# Translation Words (unfoldingWord)

**unfoldingWord® Translation Words** © 2022 unfoldingWord. Released under CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. *unfoldingWord® Translation Words* has been adapted in the following languages: Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文) from *unfoldingWord® Translation Words* © 2022 unfoldingWord. Released under CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license by Mission Mutual



--------------------------------


## Baal (id: 26355)

Baal
====

Facts:
------

“Baal” means “lord” or “master” and was the name of the primary false god that was worshiped by the Canaanites.

* There were also local false gods that had “Baal” as part of their names, such as “Baal of Peor.” Sometimes all these gods together are referred to as “the Baals.”
* Some people had names that included the word “Baal” in them.
* The worship of Baal included evil practices such as sacrificing children and using prostitutes.
* At different time periods throughout their history, the Israelites also became deeply involved in Baal worship, following the example of the pagan nations around them.
* During the reign of King Ahab, God’s prophet Elijah set up a test to prove to the people that Baal does not exist and that Yahweh is the only true God. As a result, the prophets of Baal were destroyed and the people started worshiping Yahweh again.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Ahab, Asherah, Elijah, false god, prostitute, Yahweh)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Kings 16:31](https://ref.ly/1Kgs16:31)
* [1 Samuel 7:3–4](https://ref.ly/1Sam7:3-1Sam7:4)
* [Jeremiah 2:7–8](https://ref.ly/Jer2:7-Jer2:8)
* [Judges 2:11](https://ref.ly/Judg2:11)
* [Numbers 22:41](https://ref.ly/Num22:41)

Examples from the Bible stories:
--------------------------------

* **19:2** Ahab was an evil man who encouraged people to worship a false god named **Baal**.
* **19:6** All the people of the entire kingdom of Israel, including the 450 prophets of **Baal**, came to Mount Carmel. Elijah said to the people, “How long will you keep changing your mind? If Yahweh is God, serve him! If **Baal** is God, serve him!”
* **19:7** Then Elijah said to the prophets of **Baal**, “Kill a bull and prepare it as a sacrifice, but do not light the fire.”
* **19:8** Then the prophets of **Baal** prayed to **Baal**, “Hear us, O **Baal**!”
* **19:12** So the people captured the prophets of **Baal**. Then Elijah took them away from there and killed them.

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1120, G08960

* **Associated Passages:** Numbers 22:41; Judges 2:11; 1 Kings 16:31; Romans 11:4; 1 Samuel 7:3-4; Jeremiah 2:7-8
* **Associated Articles:** Ahab (ID: `26296@UWTranslationWords`); Asherim (ID: `26341@Unknown`); Elijah (ID: `26555@UWTranslationWords`); False God (ID: `26586@UWTranslationWords`); Prostitute (ID: `26990@UWTranslationWords`); Yahweh (ID: `27218@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Baal (ID: `person:Baal.2`); Baal (ID: `person:Baal`); Baalath-beer (ID: `place:Baalath-beer`); LORD (ID: `deity:Lord`); Baal (ID: `deity:Baal`)

## Baasha (id: 26356)

Baasha
======

Facts:
------

Baasha was one of Israel’s evil kings, who influenced the Israelites to worship idols.

* Baasha was the third king of Israel and reigned for twenty\-four years, during the time when Asa was king of Judah.
* He was a military commander who became king by killing the previous king, Nadab.
* During Baasha’s reign there were many wars between the kingdoms of Israel and Judah, especially with King Asa of Judah.
* Baasha’s many sins caused God to eventually remove him from office by his death.

(Translation suggestions: Translate Names)

(See also: Asa, false god)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Kings 15:17](https://ref.ly/1Kgs15:17)
* [2 Kings 9:9](https://ref.ly/2Kgs9:9)
* [Jeremiah 41:9](https://ref.ly/Jer41:9)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1201

* **Associated Passages:** 1 Kings 15:17; 2 Kings 9:9; Jeremiah 41:9
* **Associated Articles:** Asa (ID: `26337@UWTranslationWords`); False God (ID: `26586@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Baasha (ID: `person:Baasha`)

## Babel (id: 26357)

Babel
=====

Facts:
------

Babel was a chief city in a region called Shinar in the southern part of Mesopotamia. Shinar was later called Babylonia.

* The city of Babel was founded by Ham’s great\-grandson, Nimrod, who ruled the region of Shinar.
* The people of Shinar became proud and decided to build a tower high enough to reach heaven. This later became known as the “Tower of Babel.”
* Because the people building the tower refused to spread out as God had commanded, he confused their languages so that they could not understand one another. This forced them to move away to live in many different places across the earth.
* The root meaning of the word for “Babel” is “confusion,” named for when God confused the people’s language.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Babylon, Ham, Mesopotamia)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Genesis 10:8–10](https://ref.ly/Gen10:8-Gen10:10)
* [Genesis 11:9](https://ref.ly/Gen11:9)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0894

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 11:9; Genesis 10:8-10
* **Associated Articles:** Babylon (ID: `26358@UWTranslationWords`); Ham (ID: `26671@UWTranslationWords`); Mesopotamia (ID: `26872@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Babylon (ID: `place:Babylon`)

## Babylon (id: 26358)

Babylon, Babylonia, Babylonian
==============================

Facts:
------

The city of Babylon was the capital of the ancient region of Babylonia, which was also part of the Babylonian Empire.

* Babylon was located along the Euphrates River, in the same region where the Tower of Babel had been built hundreds of years before.
* Sometimes the word “Babylon” refers to the entire Babylonian Empire. For example, the “king of Babylon” ruled the entire empire, not just the city.
* The Babylonians were a powerful people group who attacked the kingdom of Judah and kept the people in exile in Babylonia for 70 years.
* Part of this region was called “Chaldea” and the people living there were the “Chaldeans.” As a result, the term “Chaldea” was often used to refer to Babylonia. (See: synecdoche)

(See also: Babel, Chaldea, Judah, Nebuchadnezzar)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Chronicles 9:1](https://ref.ly/1Chr9:1)
* [2 Kings 17:24–26](https://ref.ly/2Kgs17:24-2Kgs17:26)
* [Acts 7:43](https://ref.ly/Acts7:43)
* [Daniel 1:2](https://ref.ly/Dan1:2)
* [Ezekiel 12:13](https://ref.ly/Ezek12:13)
* [Matthew 1:11](https://ref.ly/Matt1:11)
* [Matthew 1:17](https://ref.ly/Matt1:17)

Examples from the Bible stories:
--------------------------------

* **20:6** About 100 years after the Assyrians destroyed the kingdom of Israel, God sent Nebuchadnezzar, king of the **Babylonians**, to attack the kingdom of Judah. **Babylon** was a powerful empire.
* **20:7** But after a few years, the king of Judah rebelled against **Babylon**. So, the **Babylonians** came back and attacked the kingdom of Judah. They captured the city of Jerusalem, destroyed the Temple, and took away all the treasures of the city and the Temple.
* **20:9** Nebuchadnezzar and his army took almost all of the people of the kingdom of Judah to **Babylon**, leaving only the poorest people behind to plant the fields.
* **20:11** About seventy years later, Cyrus, the king of the Persians, defeated **Babylon**.

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H3778, H3779, H8152, H0894, H0895, H0896, G08970

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 10:10; Genesis 11:9; 1 Chronicles 9:1; Ezra 1:11; Ezra 2:1; Ezra 4:9; Ezra 5:12; Ezra 5:13; Ezra 5:14; Ezra 5:17; Ezra 6:1; Ezra 6:5; Ezra 7:6; Ezra 7:9; Ezra 7:16; Ezra 8:1; Nehemiah 7:6; Nehemiah 13:6; Ezekiel 12:13; Daniel 1:2; Matthew 1:11; Matthew 1:12; Matthew 1:17; Acts 7:43; 1 Peter 5:13; Revelation 14:8; Revelation 16:19; Revelation 17:5; Revelation 18:2; Revelation 18:10; Revelation 18:21; 2 Kings 17:24-26
* **Associated Articles:** Babel (ID: `26357@UWTranslationWords`); Chaldeans (ID: `26440@UWTranslationWords`); Judah (ID: `26782@UWTranslationWords`); Kingdom of Judah (ID: `26800@Unknown`); Nebuchadnezzar (ID: `26905@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Babylon (ID: `place:Babylon.2`); Babylon (ID: `place:Babylon`); Babylonians (ID: `group:Babylon`); Babylonia (ID: `place:Babylonia`)

## Balaam (id: 26359)

Balaam
======

Facts:
------

Balaam was a pagan prophet whom King Balek hired to curse Israel while they were camped at the Jordan River in northern Moab, preparing to enter the land of Canaan.

* Balaam was from the city of Pethor, which was located in the region around the Euphrates River, about 400 miles away from the land of Moab.
* The Midianite king, Balek, was afraid of the strength and numbers of the Israelites, so he hired Balaam to curse them.
* As Balaam was traveling toward Israel, an angel of God stood in his path so that Balaam’s donkey stopped. God also gave the donkey the ability to speak to Balaam.
* God did not allow Balaam to curse the Israelites and commanded him to bless them instead.
* Later however, Balaam still brought evil on the Israelites when he influenced them to worship the false god Baal\-peor.

(Translation suggestions: Translate Names)

(See also: bless, Canaan, curse, donkey, Euphrates River, Jordan River, Midian, Moab, Peor)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [2 Peter 2:16](https://ref.ly/2Pet2:16)
* [Deuteronomy 23:3–4](https://ref.ly/Deut23:3-Deut23:4)
* [Joshua 13:22–23](https://ref.ly/Josh13:22-Josh13:23)
* [Numbers 22:5](https://ref.ly/Num22:5)
* [Revelation 2:14](https://ref.ly/Rev2:14)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1109, G09030

* **Associated Passages:** Numbers 22:5; Nehemiah 13:2; 2 Peter 2:15; 2 Peter 2:16; Jude 1:11; Revelation 2:14; Deuteronomy 23:3-4; Joshua 13:22-23
* **Associated Articles:** Bless (ID: `26403@UWTranslationWords`); Canaan (ID: `26430@UWTranslationWords`); Curse (ID: `26490@UWTranslationWords`); Donkey (ID: `26536@UWTranslationWords`); Euphrates (ID: `26573@UWTranslationWords`); Jordan River (ID: `26775@UWTranslationWords`); Midian (ID: `26876@UWTranslationWords`); Moab (ID: `26884@UWTranslationWords`); Peor (ID: `26943@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Balaam (ID: `person:Balaam`)

## Banquet (id: 26360)

banquet
=======

Definition:
-----------

A banquet is large, formal meal that usually includes several food courses.

* In ancient times, kings often served banquet meals to entertain political leaders and other important guests.
* This could also be translated as “elaborate meal” or “important feast” or “multi\-course meal.”

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Daniel 5:10](https://ref.ly/Dan5:10)
* [Isaiah 5:11–12](https://ref.ly/Isa5:11-Isa5:12)
* [Jeremiah 16:8](https://ref.ly/Jer16:8)
* [Luke 5:29–32](https://ref.ly/Luke5:29-Luke5:32)
* [Song of Songs 2:3–4](https://ref.ly/Song2:3-Song2:4)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H4960, H4961, H8354, G11730, G14030

* **Associated Passages:** Job 1:5; Jeremiah 16:8; Daniel 5:10; Luke 5:29; Luke 14:13; Isaiah 5:11-12; Luke 5:29-32; Song of Songs 2:3-4


## Baptize (id: 26361)

baptize, baptized, baptism
==========================

Definition:
-----------

In the New Testament, the terms “baptize” and “baptism” usually refer to ritually bathing a Christian with water to show that he has been cleansed from sin and has been united with Christ.

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* Christians have different views about how a person should be baptized with water. It is probably best to translate this term in a general way that allows for different ways of applying the water.
* Depending on the context, the term “baptize” could be translated as “purify,” “pour out on,” “plunge (or dip) into,” “wash.” For example, “baptize you with water” could be translated as “plunge you into water.”
* The term “baptism” could be translated as “purification,” “a pouring out,” “a dipping,” “a cleansing.”
* Also consider how this term is translated in a Bible translation in a local or national language.

(See also: How to Translate Unknowns)

(See also: John (the Baptist), repent, Holy Spirit)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Acts 2:38](https://ref.ly/Acts2:38)
* [Acts 8:36](https://ref.ly/Acts8:36)
* [Acts 9:18](https://ref.ly/Acts9:18)
* [Acts 10:48](https://ref.ly/Acts10:48)
* [Luke 3:16](https://ref.ly/Luke3:16)
* [Matthew 3:14](https://ref.ly/Matt3:14)
* [Matthew 28:18–19](https://ref.ly/Matt28:18-Matt28:19)

Examples from the Bible stories:
--------------------------------

* **24:3** When people heard John’s message, many of them repented from their sins, and John **baptized** them. Many religious leaders also came to be **baptized** by John, but they did not repent or confess their sins.
* **24:6** The next day, Jesus came to be **baptized** by John.
* **24:7** John said to Jesus, “I am not worthy to **baptize** you. You should **baptize** me instead.”
* **42:10** “So go, make disciples of all people groups by **baptizing** them in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit and by teaching them to obey everything I have commanded you.”
* **43:11** Peter answered them, “Every one of you should repent and be **baptized** in the name of Jesus Christ so that God will forgive your sins.”
* **43:12** About 3,000 people believed what Peter said and became disciples of Jesus. They were **baptized** and became part of the church at Jerusalem.
* **45:11** As Philip and the Ethiopian traveled, they came to some water. The Ethiopian said, “Look! There is some water! May I be **baptized**?”
* **46:5** Saul immediately was able to see again, and Ananias **baptized** him.
* **49:14** Jesus invites you to believe in him and be **baptized**.

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: G09070

* **Associated Passages:** Matthew 3:6; Matthew 3:7; Matthew 3:11; Matthew 3:13; Matthew 3:14; Matthew 3:16; Matthew 21:25; Matthew 28:19; Mark 1:4; Mark 1:5; Mark 1:8; Mark 1:9; Mark 6:14; Mark 6:24; Mark 6:25; Mark 10:38; Mark 10:39; Mark 11:30; Luke 3:3; Luke 3:7; Luke 3:12; Luke 3:16; Luke 3:21; Luke 7:29; Luke 7:30; Luke 12:50; Luke 20:4; John 1:25; John 1:26; John 1:28; John 1:31; John 1:33; John 3:22; John 3:23; John 3:26; John 4:1; John 4:2; John 10:40; Acts 1:5; Acts 1:22; Acts 2:38; Acts 2:41; Acts 8:12; Acts 8:13; Acts 8:16; Acts 8:36; Acts 8:38; Acts 9:18; Acts 10:37; Acts 10:47; Acts 10:48; Acts 11:16; Acts 13:24; Acts 16:15; Acts 16:33; Acts 18:8; Acts 18:25; Acts 19:3; Acts 19:4; Acts 19:5; Acts 22:16; Romans 6:3; Romans 6:4; 1 Corinthians 1:13; 1 Corinthians 1:14; 1 Corinthians 1:15; 1 Corinthians 1:16; 1 Corinthians 1:17; 1 Corinthians 10:2; 1 Corinthians 12:13; 1 Corinthians 15:29; Ephesians 4:5; Colossians 2:12; 1 Peter 3:21; Matthew 28:18-19
* **Associated Articles:** Holy Spirit (ID: `26702@UWTranslationWords`); John the Baptist (ID: `26770@UWTranslationWords`); Repent (ID: `27028@UWTranslationWords`)


## Barabbas (id: 26362)

Barabbas
========

Facts:
------

Barabbas was a prisoner in Jerusalem at the time when Jesus was arrested.

* Barabbas was a criminal who had committed crimes of murder and rebellion against the Roman government.
* When Pontius Pilate offered to either release Barabbas or Jesus, the people chose Barabbas.
* So Pilate allowed Barabbas to go free, but condemned Jesus to be killed.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Pilate, Rome)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [John 18:40](https://ref.ly/John18:40)
* [Luke 23:19](https://ref.ly/Luke23:19)
* [Mark 15:7](https://ref.ly/Mark15:7)
* [Matthew 27:15–16](https://ref.ly/Matt27:15-Matt27:16)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: G09120

* **Associated Passages:** Matthew 27:16; Matthew 27:17; Matthew 27:20; Matthew 27:21; Matthew 27:26; Mark 15:7; Mark 15:11; Mark 15:15; Luke 23:18; Luke 23:19; John 18:40; Matthew 27:15-16
* **Associated Articles:** Pilate (ID: `26962@UWTranslationWords`); Rome (ID: `27039@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Barabbas (ID: `person:Barabbas`)

## Barley (id: 26363)

barley
======

Definition:
-----------

The term “barley” refers to a kind of grain that is used to make bread.

* The barley plant has a long stalk with a head at the top where the seeds or grains grow.
* Barley does well in warmer weather so it is often harvested in spring or summer.
* When barley is threshed, the edible seeds are separated from the worthless chaff.
* Barley grain is ground up into flour, which is then mixed with water or oil to make bread.
* If barley is not known, this could be translated as “grain called barley” or “barley grain.”

(See also: How to Translate Unknowns)

(See also: grain, thresh, wheat)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Chronicles 11:12–14](https://ref.ly/1Chr11:12-1Chr11:14)
* [Job 31:40](https://ref.ly/Job31:40)
* [Judges 7:14](https://ref.ly/Judg7:14)
* [Numbers 5:15](https://ref.ly/Num5:15)
* [Revelation 6:6](https://ref.ly/Rev6:6)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H8184, G29150, G29160

* **Associated Passages:** Exodus 9:31; Numbers 5:15; Judges 7:14; Ruth 1:22; Ruth 2:17; Ruth 2:23; Ruth 3:2; Ruth 3:15; Ruth 3:17; Job 31:40; John 6:9; John 6:13; Revelation 6:6; 1 Chronicles 11:12-14
* **Associated Articles:** Grain (ID: `26659@UWTranslationWords`); Thresh (ID: `27158@UWTranslationWords`); Wheat (ID: `27203@UWTranslationWords`); John 6:9 (#1) (ID: `211370@Unknown`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Barley (ID: `flora:Barley`)

## Barnabas (id: 26364)

Barnabas
========

Facts:
------

Barnabas was one of the early Christians who lived during the time of the apostles.

* Barnabas was from the Israelite tribe of Levi and was from the island of Cyprus.
* When Saul (Paul) became a Christian, Barnabas urged the other believers to accept him as a fellow believer.
* Barnabas and Paul traveled together to preach the good news about Jesus in different cities.
* His name was Joseph, but he was called “Barnabas,” which means “son of encouragement.”

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Christian, Cyprus, good news, Levite, Paul)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Acts 4:36](https://ref.ly/Acts4:36)
* [Acts 11:26](https://ref.ly/Acts11:26)
* [Acts 13:3](https://ref.ly/Acts13:3)
* [Acts 15:33](https://ref.ly/Acts15:33)
* [Colossians 4:10–11](https://ref.ly/Col4:10-Col4:11)
* [Galatians 2:9–10](https://ref.ly/Gal2:9-Gal2:10)
* [Galatians 2:13](https://ref.ly/Gal2:13)

Examples from the Bible stories:
--------------------------------

* **46:8** Then a believer named **Barnabas** took Saul to the apostles and told them how Saul had preached boldly in Damascus.
* **46:9** **Barnabas** and Saul went there to teach these new believers more about Jesus and to strengthen the church. I
* **46:10** One day, while the Christians at Antioch were fasting and praying, the Holy Spirit said to them, “Set apart for me **Barnabas** and Saul to do the work I have called them to do.” So the church in Antioch prayed for **Barnabas** and Saul and placed their hands on them.

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: G09210

* **Associated Passages:** Acts 4:36; Acts 9:27; Acts 11:22; Acts 11:26; Acts 11:30; Acts 12:25; Acts 13:1; Acts 13:2; Acts 13:3; Acts 13:7; Acts 13:43; Acts 13:46; Acts 13:50; Acts 14:12; Acts 14:14; Acts 14:20; Acts 15:2; Acts 15:12; Acts 15:22; Acts 15:25; Acts 15:33; Acts 15:35; Acts 15:36; Acts 15:37; Acts 15:39; 1 Corinthians 9:6; Galatians 2:13; Colossians 4:10; Colossians 4:10-11; Galatians 2:9-10
* **Associated Articles:** Christian (ID: `26446@UWTranslationWords`); Cyprus (ID: `26495@UWTranslationWords`); Good News (ID: `26654@UWTranslationWords`); Levite (ID: `26825@UWTranslationWords`); Paul (ID: `26937@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Barnabas (ID: `person:Barnabas`); Judas (ID: `person:Judas.5`)

## Barren (id: 26365)

barren, dry
===========

Definition:
-----------

To be “barren” means to not be fertile or fruitful.

* Soil or land that is barren is not able to produce any plants.
* A woman who is barren is one who is physically unable to conceive or bear a child.

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* When “barren” is used to refer to land, it could be translated as “not fertile” or “unfruitful” or “without plants.”
* When it is referring to a barren woman, it could be translated as “childless” or “not able to bear children” or “unable to conceive a child.”

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Samuel 2:5](https://ref.ly/1Sam2:5)
* [Galatians 4:27](https://ref.ly/Gal4:27)
* [Genesis 11:30](https://ref.ly/Gen11:30)
* [Job 3:7](https://ref.ly/Job3:7)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H4420, H6115, H6135, H6723, H7921, G06920, G47230

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 11:30; Genesis 25:21; Genesis 29:31; Exodus 23:26; 1 Samuel 2:5; Job 3:7; Job 24:19; Job 30:3; Proverbs 30:16; Zephaniah 2:13; Luke 1:7; Luke 1:36; Luke 23:29; Galatians 4:27


## Bartholomew (id: 26366)

Bartholomew
===========

Facts:
------

Bartholomew was one of Jesus’ twelve apostles.

* Along with the other apostles, Bartholomew was sent out to preach the gospel and do miracles in Jesus’ name.
* He was also one of those who saw Jesus return to heaven.
* A few weeks after that, he was with the other apostles in Jerusalem at Pentecost when the Holy Spirit came upon them.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: apostle, good news, Holy Spirit, miracle, Pentecost, the twelve)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Acts 1:12–14](https://ref.ly/Acts1:12-Acts1:14)
* [Luke 6:14–16](https://ref.ly/Luke6:14-Luke6:16)
* [Mark 3:17–19](https://ref.ly/Mark3:17-Mark3:19)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: G09180

* **Associated Passages:** Matthew 10:3; Mark 3:18; Luke 6:14; Acts 1:13; Acts 1:12-14; Luke 6:14-16; Mark 3:17-19
* **Associated Articles:** Apostle (ID: `26324@UWTranslationWords`); Good News (ID: `26654@UWTranslationWords`); Holy Spirit (ID: `26702@UWTranslationWords`); Miracle (ID: `26880@UWTranslationWords`); Pentecost (ID: `26940@UWTranslationWords`); The Twelve (ID: `27154@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Bartholomew (ID: `person:Bartholomew`)

## Baruch (id: 26367)

Baruch
======

Facts:
------

Baruch is the name of several men in the Old Testament.

* One Baruch (son of Zabbal) worked with Nehemiah to repair the walls of Jerusalem.
* Also during the time of Nehemiah, another Baruch (son of Kol\-Hozeh) was one of the leaders who settled in Jerusalem after its walls were restored.
* A different Baruch (son of Neriah) was an assistant to the prophet Jeremiah, who helped him with various practical tasks such as writing down the messages God gave to Jeremiah and then reading them to the people.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: disciple, Jeremiah, Jerusalem, Nehemiah, prophet)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Jeremiah 32:12](https://ref.ly/Jer32:12)
* [Jeremiah 36:4](https://ref.ly/Jer36:4)
* [Jeremiah 43:1–3](https://ref.ly/Jer43:1-Jer43:3)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1263

* **Associated Passages:** Nehemiah 3:20; Nehemiah 10:6; Nehemiah 11:5; Jeremiah 32:12; Jeremiah 36:4; Jeremiah 43:1-3
* **Associated Articles:** Disciple (ID: `26527@UWTranslationWords`); Jeremiah (ID: `26753@UWTranslationWords`); Jerusalem (ID: `26756@UWTranslationWords`); Nehemiah (ID: `26907@UWTranslationWords`); Prophet (ID: `26987@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Baruch (ID: `person:Baruch.2`); Baruch (ID: `person:Baruch.3`); Baruch (ID: `person:Baruch.4`); Baruch (ID: `person:Baruch`)

## Bashan (id: 26368)

Bashan
======

Facts:
------

Bashan was a region of land east of the Sea of Galilee. It covered an area that is now part of Syria and the Golan Heights.

* An Old Testament city of refuge called “Golan” was located in the region of Bashan.
* Bashan was a very fertile region known for its oak trees and pasturing animals.
* Genesis 14 records that Bashan was the site of a war between several kings and their nations.
* During Israel’s wanderings in the desert after their escape from Egypt, they took possession of part of the region of Bashan.
* Years later, King Solomon obtained supplies from that region.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Egypt, oak, Sea of Galilee, Syria)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Kings 4:13](https://ref.ly/1Kgs4:13)
* [Amos 4:1](https://ref.ly/Amos4:1)
* [Jeremiah 22:20–21](https://ref.ly/Jer22:20-Jer22:21)
* [Joshua 9:10](https://ref.ly/Josh9:10)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1316

* **Associated Passages:** Joshua 9:10; 1 Kings 4:13; Nehemiah 9:22; Amos 4:1; Jeremiah 22:20-21
* **Associated Articles:** Egypt (ID: `26548@UWTranslationWords`); Oak (ID: `26915@UWTranslationWords`); Sea of Galilee (ID: `27065@UWTranslationWords`); Syria (ID: `27135@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Bashan (ID: `place:Bashan`)

## Bathsheba (id: 26369)

Bathsheba
=========

Facts:
------

Bathsheba was the wife of Uriah, a soldier in King David’s army. After Uriah’s death, she became the wife of David, and the mother of Solomon.

* David committed adultery with Bathsheba while she was married to Uriah.
* When Bathsheba became pregnant with David’s child, David caused Uriah to be killed in battle.
* David then married Bathsheba and she gave birth to their child.
* God punished David for his sin by causing the child to die several days after he was born.
* Later, Bathsheba gave birth to another son, Solomon, who grew up to become king after David.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: David, Solomon. Uriah)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Chronicles 3:4–5](https://ref.ly/1Chr3:4-1Chr3:5)
* [1 Kings 1:11](https://ref.ly/1Kgs1:11)
* [2 Samuel 11:3](https://ref.ly/2Sam11:3)
* [Psalm 51:1–2](https://ref.ly/Ps51:1-Ps51:2)

Examples from the Bible stories:
--------------------------------

* **17:10** One day, when all of David’s soldiers were away from home fighting battles, he got up from an afternoon nap and saw a beautiful woman bathing. Her name was **Bathsheba**.
* **17:11** A short time later **Bathsheba** sent a message to David saying that she was pregnant.
* **17:12** **Bathsheba’s** husband, a man named Uriah, was one of David’s best soldiers.
* **17:13** After Uriah was killed, David married **Bathsheba**.
* **17:14** Later, David and **Bathsheba** had another son, and they named him Solomon.

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1339

* **Associated Passages:** 2 Samuel 11:3; 1 Kings 1:11; Psalms 51:1-2; 1 Chronicles 3:4-5
* **Associated Articles:** David (ID: `26503@UWTranslationWords`); Solomon (ID: `27107@UWTranslationWords`); Uriah (ID: `27188@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Bathsheba (ID: `person:Bathsheba`)

## Bear (id: 26373)

bear, bearer, bore, borne, produce, produced
============================================

Facts:
------

Used in this sense, the term “bear” means to “produce” or “give birth to.”

* A common expression in the Bible is “bear fruit,” which means “produce fruit”
* When speaking of a woman who will bear a child, this means “give birth to” a child
* Depending on context, this term could be translated as “produce” or “give birth to.”

(Translation suggestions: fruit)

Bible References:
-----------------

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s:

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 3:16; Genesis 4:1; Genesis 4:2; Genesis 4:13; Genesis 4:17; Genesis 4:18; Genesis 4:20; Genesis 4:22; Genesis 4:25; Genesis 4:26; Genesis 6:1; Genesis 6:4; Genesis 10:1; Genesis 10:21; Genesis 14:14; Genesis 16:1; Genesis 16:2; Genesis 16:11; Genesis 16:15; Genesis 16:16; Genesis 17:12; Genesis 17:13; Genesis 17:17; Genesis 17:19; Genesis 17:21; Genesis 17:23; Genesis 17:27; Genesis 18:13; Genesis 19:37; Genesis 19:38; Genesis 20:17; Genesis 21:2; Genesis 21:3; Genesis 21:5; Genesis 21:7; Genesis 21:9; Genesis 22:20; Genesis 22:24; Genesis 24:15; Genesis 24:24; Genesis 24:36; Genesis 24:47; Genesis 25:2; Genesis 25:12; Genesis 25:24; Genesis 25:26; Genesis 29:32; Genesis 29:33; Genesis 29:34; Genesis 29:35; Genesis 30:1; Genesis 30:3; Genesis 30:5; Genesis 30:7; Genesis 30:9; Genesis 30:10; Genesis 30:12; Genesis 30:17; Genesis 30:19; Genesis 30:20; Genesis 30:21; Genesis 30:23; Genesis 30:25; Genesis 30:39; Genesis 31:8; Genesis 31:43; Genesis 34:1; Genesis 35:16; Genesis 35:17; Genesis 35:26; Genesis 36:4; Genesis 36:5; Genesis 36:12; Genesis 36:14; Genesis 38:3; Genesis 38:4; Genesis 38:5; Genesis 38:27; Genesis 38:28; Genesis 40:20; Genesis 41:50; Genesis 44:27; Genesis 46:15; Genesis 46:18; Genesis 46:20; Genesis 46:22; Genesis 46:25; Genesis 46:27; Genesis 48:5; Genesis 50:23; Exodus 6:20; Exodus 6:23; Exodus 6:25; Exodus 18:22; Proverbs 9:12; Proverbs 17:17; Proverbs 17:25; Proverbs 23:25; Proverbs 30:21; Matthew 1:21; Matthew 1:23; Matthew 3:11; Matthew 4:6; Matthew 8:17; Matthew 17:17; Matthew 20:12; Mark 9:19; Mark 14:13; Luke 1:13; Luke 1:31; Luke 1:57; Luke 4:11; Luke 7:14; Luke 9:41; Luke 10:4; Luke 11:27; Luke 13:9; Luke 14:27; Luke 22:10; Luke 23:29; John 12:24; John 15:2; John 15:4; John 15:5; John 15:8; John 15:16; John 16:12; John 19:17; John 20:15; Acts 3:2; Acts 9:15; Acts 15:10; Acts 18:14; Acts 21:35; Romans 11:18; Romans 15:1; 1 Corinthians 4:12; 1 Corinthians 9:12; 1 Corinthians 13:7; 1 Corinthians 15:49; 2 Corinthians 11:1; 2 Corinthians 11:4; 2 Corinthians 11:19; 2 Corinthians 11:20; Ephesians 4:2; Colossians 3:13; 1 Thessalonians 3:1; 1 Thessalonians 3:5; 1 Timothy 5:14; Hebrews 12:20; Hebrews 13:13; Hebrews 13:22; 1 Peter 2:24; Revelation 2:2; Revelation 17:7
* **Associated Articles:** Bear-Carry Burden (ID: `26370@Unknown`); Fruit (ID: `26618@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Bear (ID: `fauna:Bear`)

## Bear Animal (id: 26374)

bear
====

Definition:
-----------

A bear is a large, four\-legged furry animal with dark brown or black hair, with sharp teeth and claws. Bears were common in Israel during Bible times.

* These animals live in forests and mountain areas; they eat fish, insects, and plants.
* In the Old Testament, the bear is used as a symbol of strength.
* While tending sheep, the shepherd David fought a bear and defeated it.
* Two bears came out of the forest and attacked a group of youths who had mocked the prophet Elisha.

(See also: David, Elisha)

Bible References:
-----------------

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1677, G07150

* **Associated Passages:** Proverbs 17:12; Proverbs 28:15; Revelation 13:2
* **Associated Articles:** David (ID: `26503@UWTranslationWords`); Elisha (ID: `26556@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Bear (ID: `fauna:Bear`)

## Bear-Carry Burden (id: 26370)

bear, bears, bore, borne, bearers, bearer, bearing, carry
=========================================================

Facts:
------

Used in this sense, the term “bear” literally means to “carry” something.

* To “bear a burden” means to “carry something difficult” or to “experience difficult things.” These difficult things could include physical or emotional suffering.
* The term “burden bearers” refers to men who carry heavy things and could be translated as “burden carriers” or “carriers.”
* The term “armor bearer” could be translated as “armor carrier.”
* The phrase “bearer of news” could be translated as “carrier of news.”
* Depending on context, this term could be translated as “carry” or “endure.”

(See also: endure, strength)

Bible References:
-----------------

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s:

* **Associated Articles:** Endure (ID: `26559@UWTranslationWords`)


## Bear-Held Responsible For (id: 26371)

bear, bore, borne
=================

Facts:
------

Used in this sense, the term “bear” means to “be responsible for” something or to “be held responsible for” something.

* The statement that “a son will not bear the iniquity of his father” means that he “will not be held responsible for” or “will not be punished for” his father’s sins.
* Depending on context, this term could be translated as “be responsible for” or “be held responsible for.”

(See also: iniquity)

Bible References:
-----------------

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s:

* **Associated Articles:** Iniquity (ID: `26726@UWTranslationWords`)


## Bear-witness_testify (id: 26372)

bear, bear witness, bear false witness, bore witness, borne witness
===================================================================

Facts:
------

Used in this sense, the phrase “bear witness” means to testify about something or give a report about something.

* The expression “bear witness” means “testify” or “report what one has seen or experienced.”
* The expression “bear false witness” means “testify falsely” or “report falsely what one has seen or experienced.”
* Depending on context, the phrase “bear witness” could be translated as “testify” or “report.”

(See also: report, testimony)

Bible References:
-----------------

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s:

* **Associated Articles:** Report (ID: `27029@UWTranslationWords`); Testimony (ID: `27151@UWTranslationWords`)


## Beast (id: 26375)

beast
=====

Facts:
------

In the Bible, the term “beast” is often just another way of saying “animal.”

* A wild beast is a type of animal that lives freely in the forest or fields and has not been trained by people.
* A domestic beast is an animal that lives with people and is kept for food or for performing work, such as plowing fields. Often the term “livestock” is used to refer to this kind of animal.
* The Old Testament book of Daniel and the New Testament book of Revelation describe visions which have beasts that represent evil powers and authorities that oppose God. (See: Metaphor)
* Some of these beasts are described as having strange features, such as several heads and many horns. They often have power and authority, indicating that they may represent countries, nations, or other political powers.
* Ways to translate this could include “creature” or “created thing” or “animal” or “wild animal,” depending on the context.

(See also: authority, Daniel, livestock, nation, power, reveal, Beelzebul)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Corinthians 15:32](https://ref.ly/1Cor15:32)
* [1 Samuel 17:44](https://ref.ly/1Sam17:44)
* [2 Chronicles 25:18](https://ref.ly/2Chr25:18)
* [Jeremiah 16:1–4](https://ref.ly/Jer16:1-Jer16:4)
* [Leviticus 7:21](https://ref.ly/Lev7:21)
* [Psalms 49:12–13](https://ref.ly/Ps49:12-Ps49:13)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0338, H0929, H1165, H2123, H2416, H2423, H2874, H3753, H4806, H7409, G22260, G23410, G23420, G29340, G49680, G50740

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 7:2; Genesis 7:8; Genesis 8:20; Genesis 34:23; Genesis 36:6; Genesis 45:17; Genesis 47:18; Exodus 8:17; Exodus 8:18; Exodus 9:9; Exodus 9:10; Exodus 9:19; Exodus 9:22; Exodus 9:25; Exodus 11:5; Exodus 11:7; Exodus 12:12; Exodus 12:29; Exodus 13:2; Exodus 13:12; Exodus 13:15; Exodus 19:13; Exodus 22:10; Exodus 22:19; Leviticus 7:21; 1 Samuel 17:44; 2 Chronicles 25:18; Job 12:7; Proverbs 30:30; Mark 1:13; Luke 10:34; Acts 11:6; Acts 23:24; 1 Corinthians 15:32; 1 Corinthians 15:39; Titus 1:12; Hebrews 12:20; James 3:7; Revelation 6:8; Revelation 11:7; Revelation 13:1; Revelation 13:2; Revelation 13:3; Revelation 13:4; Revelation 13:11; Revelation 13:12; Revelation 13:14; Revelation 13:15; Revelation 13:17; Revelation 13:18; Revelation 14:9; Revelation 14:11; Revelation 15:2; Revelation 16:2; Revelation 16:10; Revelation 16:13; Revelation 17:3; Revelation 17:7; Revelation 17:8; Revelation 17:11; Revelation 17:12; Revelation 17:13; Revelation 17:16; Revelation 17:17; Revelation 19:19; Revelation 19:20; Revelation 20:4; Revelation 20:10; Jeremiah 16:1-4; Psalms 49:12-13
* **Associated Articles:** Authority (ID: `26350@UWTranslationWords`); Beelzebul (ID: `26376@UWTranslationWords`); Daniel (ID: `26500@UWTranslationWords`); Livestock (ID: `26828@UWTranslationWords`); Nation (ID: `26902@UWTranslationWords`)


## Beelzebul (id: 26376)

Beelzebul
=========

Facts:
------

Beelzebul is another name for Satan, or the devil. It is also sometimes spelled, “Beelzebub.”

* This name literally means “lord of flies” which means “ruler over demons.” But it is best to translate this term close to the original spelling rather than translate the meaning.
* It could also be translated as “Beelzebul the devil” to make it clear who is being referred to.
* This name is related to the name of the false god “Baal\-zebub” of Ekron.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: demon, Ekron, Satan)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Luke 11:15](https://ref.ly/Luke11:15)
* [Mark 3:22](https://ref.ly/Mark3:22)
* [Matthew 10:25](https://ref.ly/Matt10:25)
* [Matthew 12:25](https://ref.ly/Matt12:25)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: G09540

* **Associated Passages:** Matthew 10:25; Matthew 12:24; Matthew 12:25; Matthew 12:27; Mark 3:22; Luke 11:15; Luke 11:18; Luke 11:19
* **Associated Articles:** Demon (ID: `26516@UWTranslationWords`); Ekron (ID: `26549@UWTranslationWords`); Satan (ID: `27057@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Satan (ID: `deity:Satan`)

## Beersheba (id: 26377)

Beersheba
=========

Facts:
------

In Old Testament times, Beersheba was a city located about 45 miles southwest of Jerusalem in a desert area that is now called the Negev.

* The desert surrounding Beersheba was the wilderness area where Hagar and Ishmael wandered after Abraham sent them away from his tents.
* The name of this city means “well of the oath.” It was given this name when Abraham swore an oath to not punish King Abimelech’s men for seizing control of one of Abraham’s wells.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Abimelech, Abraham, Hagar, Ishmael, Jerusalem, oath)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Samuel 3:20](https://ref.ly/1Sam3:20)
* [2 Samuel 17:11](https://ref.ly/2Sam17:11)
* [Genesis 21:14](https://ref.ly/Gen21:14)
* [Genesis 21:31](https://ref.ly/Gen21:31)
* [Genesis 46:1](https://ref.ly/Gen46:1)
* [Nehemiah 11:30](https://ref.ly/Neh11:30)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0884

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 21:14; Genesis 21:31; Genesis 21:32; Genesis 21:33; Genesis 22:19; Genesis 26:23; Genesis 26:33; Genesis 28:10; Genesis 46:1; Genesis 46:5; 1 Samuel 3:20; 2 Samuel 17:11; Nehemiah 11:27; Nehemiah 11:30
* **Associated Articles:** Abimelech (ID: `26279@UWTranslationWords`); Abraham (ID: `26282@UWTranslationWords`); Hagar (ID: `26668@UWTranslationWords`); Ishmael (ID: `26736@UWTranslationWords`); Jerusalem (ID: `26756@UWTranslationWords`); Oath (ID: `26916@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Beersheba (ID: `place:Beersheba`)

## Beg (id: 26379)

beg, begging, begged
====================

Definition:
-----------

The term “beg” means to urgently ask someone for something.

* Often people beg or plead when they strongly need something, but don’t know if the other person will give them what they ask for.
* Depending on the context, this term could be translated as “plead” or “urgently ask.”

(See also: plead)

Bible References:
-----------------

Examples from the Bible stories:
--------------------------------

* **10:4** God sent frogs all over Egypt. Pharaoh **begged** Moses to take away the frogs.
* **29:8** “The king called the servant and said, ‘You wicked servant! I forgave your debt because you **begged** me.’”
* **32:7** The demons **begged** Jesus, “Please do not send us out of this region!” There was a herd of pigs feeding on a nearby hill. So, the demons **begged** Jesus, “Please send us into the pigs instead!”
* **32:10** The man who used to have the demons **begged** to go along with Jesus.
* **35:11** His father came out and **begged** him to come and celebrate with them, but he refused.

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s:

* **Associated Passages:** Proverbs 20:4; Matthew 8:5; Matthew 8:31; Matthew 8:34; Matthew 9:38; Matthew 14:36; Matthew 18:29; Matthew 18:32; Mark 1:40; Mark 5:10; Mark 5:12; Mark 5:17; Mark 5:18; Mark 5:23; Mark 6:56; Mark 7:32; Mark 8:22; Mark 10:46; Luke 5:12; Luke 7:3; Luke 7:4; Luke 8:28; Luke 8:31; Luke 8:32; Luke 8:38; Luke 8:41; Luke 9:38; Luke 9:40; Luke 16:3; Luke 18:35; John 9:8; Acts 13:42; Acts 16:15; Acts 16:39; Acts 21:12; Acts 24:4; Acts 25:2; Acts 28:14
* **Associated Articles:** Plead (ID: `26966@UWTranslationWords`)


## Beg-For Money (id: 26378)

beg, beggar, begging
====================

Definition:
-----------

Used in this sense, the term “beg” means to ask someone for money or for some material necessity such as food.

* A “beggar” is someone who regularly sits or stands in a public place to ask people for money.
* Beggars ask for money or food to be given them freely as a gift and do not offer to do work or some other service in exchange for the money or food. Your language may have a word for such a person or activity.
* Depending on the context, this term could be translated as “publicly ask for money” or “regularly ask for money.”

(See also: plead, alms)

Bible References:
-----------------

Examples from the Bible stories:
--------------------------------

* **44:1** One day, Peter and John were going to the Temple. As they approached the Temple gate, they saw a crippled man who was **begging** for money.

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s:

* **Associated Articles:** Alms (ID: `26304@UWTranslationWords`); Plead (ID: `26966@UWTranslationWords`)


## Beget (id: 26380)

beget, begot, begat, begotten
=============================

Definition:
-----------

The term “beget” means to become the father of someone.

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* You could translate the phrase “beget” as “bring forth” and the term “begat” as “fathered” and the term “begot” as “gave life.”
* The term “begotten” is the passive form of “beget” and means to “be born.”

Bible References:
-----------------

Word Data:
----------

* 



## Believe (id: 26381)

believe, believer, belief, unbeliever, unbelief
===============================================

Definition:
-----------

The terms “believe” and “believe in” are closely related, but have slightly different meanings:

### 1\. believe

* To believe something is to accept or trust that it is true.
* To believe someone is to acknowledge that what that person has said is true.

### 2\. believe in

* To “believe in” someone means to “trust in” that person. It means to trust that the person is who he says he is, that he always speaks the truth, and that he will do what he has promised to do.
* When a person truly believes in something, he will act in such a way that shows that belief.
* The phrase “have faith in” usually has the same meaning as “believe in.”
* To “believe in Jesus” means to believe that he is the Son of God, that he is God himself who also became human and who died as a sacrifice to pay for our sins. It means to trust him as Savior and live in a way that honors him.

### 3\. believer

In the Bible, the term “believer” refers to someone who believes in and relies on Jesus Christ as Savior.

* The term “believer” literally means “person who believes.”
* The term “Christian” eventually came to be the main title for believers because it indicates that they believe in Christ and obey his teachings.

### 4\. unbelief

The term “unbelief” refers to not believing something or someone.

* In the Bible, “unbelief” refers to not believing in or not trusting in Jesus as one’s Savior.
* A person who does not believe in Jesus is called an “unbeliever.”

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* To “believe” could be translated as to “know to be true” or “know to be right.”
* To “believe in” could be translated as “trust completely” or “trust and obey” or “completely rely on and follow.”
* Some translations may prefer to say “believer in Jesus” or “believer in Christ.”
* This term could also be translated by a word or phrase that means “person who trusts in Jesus” or “someone who knows Jesus and lives for him.”
* Other ways to translate “believer” could be “follower of Jesus” or “person who knows and obeys Jesus.”
* The term “believer” is a general term for any believer in Christ, while “disciple” and “apostle” were used more specifically for people who knew Jesus while he was alive. It is best to translate these terms in different ways, in order to keep them distinct.
* Other ways to translate “unbelief” could include “lack of faith” or “not believing.”
* The term “unbeliever” could be translated as “person who does not believe in Jesus” or “someone who does not trust in Jesus as Savior.”

(See also: believe, apostle, Christian, disciple, faith, trust)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Genesis 15:6](https://ref.ly/Gen15:6)
* [Genesis 45:26](https://ref.ly/Gen45:26)
* [Job 9:16–18](https://ref.ly/Job9:16-Job9:18)
* [Habakkuk 1:5–7](https://ref.ly/Hab1:5-Hab1:7)
* [Mark 6:4–6](https://ref.ly/Mark6:4-Mark6:6)
* [Mark 1:14–15](https://ref.ly/Mark1:14-Mark1:15)
* [Luke 9:41](https://ref.ly/Luke9:41)
* [John 1:12](https://ref.ly/John1:12)
* [Acts 6:5](https://ref.ly/Acts6:5)
* [Acts 9:42](https://ref.ly/Acts9:42)
* [Acts 28:23–24](https://ref.ly/Acts28:23-Acts28:24)
* [Romans 3:3](https://ref.ly/Rom3:3)
* [1 Corinthians 6:1](https://ref.ly/1Cor6:1)
* [1 Corinthians 9:5](https://ref.ly/1Cor9:5)
* [2 Corinthians 6:15](https://ref.ly/2Cor6:15)
* [Hebrews 3:12](https://ref.ly/Heb3:12)
* [1 John 3:23](https://ref.ly/1John3:23)

Examples from the Bible stories:
--------------------------------

* **3:4** Noah warned the people about the coming flood and told them to turn to God, but they did not **believe** him.
* **4:8** Abram **believed** God’s promise. God declared that Abram was righteous because he **believed** God’s promise.
* **11:2** God provided a way to save the firstborn of anyone who **believed in** him.
* **11:6** But the Egyptians did not **believe** God or obey his commands.
* **37:5** Jesus replied, “I am the Resurrection and the Life. Whoever **believes in** me will live, even though he dies. Everyone who **believes in** me will never die. Do you **believe** this?”
* **43:1** After Jesus returned to heaven, the disciples stayed in Jerusalem as Jesus had commanded them to do. The **believers** there constantly gathered together to pray.
* **43:3** While the **believers** were all together, suddenly the house where they were was filled with a sound like a strong wind. Then something that looked like flames of fire appeared over the heads of all the **believers**.
* **43:13** Every day, more people became **believers**.
* **45:6** That day many people in Jerusalem started persecuting the followers of Jesus, so the **believers** fled to other places. But in spite of this, they preached about Jesus everywhere they went.
* **46:1** Saul was the young man who guarded the robes of the men who killed Stephen. He did not believe in Jesus, so he persecuted the **believers**.
* **46:9** Some **believers** who fled from the persecution in Jerusalem went far away to the city of Antioch and preached about Jesus.
* **46:9** It was at Antioch that **believers** in Jesus were first called “Christians.”
* **47:14** They also wrote many letters to encourage and teach the **believers** in the churches.

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0539, H0540, G05430, G05440, G05690, G05700, G05710, G39820, G41000, G41020, G41030, G41350

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 15:6; Genesis 45:26; Exodus 4:1; Exodus 4:5; Exodus 4:8; Exodus 4:9; Exodus 4:31; Exodus 14:31; Jonah 3:5; Matthew 8:13; Matthew 9:28; Matthew 13:58; Matthew 17:17; Matthew 18:6; Matthew 21:22; Matthew 21:25; Matthew 21:32; Matthew 24:23; Matthew 24:26; Matthew 27:42; Mark 1:15; Mark 5:36; Mark 6:6; Mark 9:19; Mark 9:23; Mark 9:24; Mark 9:42; Mark 11:23; Mark 11:24; Mark 11:31; Mark 13:21; Mark 15:32; Luke 1:20; Luke 1:45; Luke 8:12; Luke 8:13; Luke 8:50; Luke 9:41; Luke 20:5; Luke 22:67; Luke 24:25; John 1:7; John 1:12; John 1:50; John 2:11; John 2:22; John 2:23; John 3:12; John 3:15; John 3:16; John 3:18; John 3:36; John 4:21; John 4:39; John 4:41; John 4:42; John 4:48; John 4:50; John 4:53; John 5:24; John 5:38; John 5:44; John 5:46; John 5:47; John 6:29; John 6:30; John 6:35; John 6:36; John 6:40; John 6:47; John 6:64; John 6:69; John 7:5; John 7:31; John 7:38; John 7:39; John 7:48; John 8:24; John 8:30; John 8:31; John 8:45; John 8:46; John 9:18; John 9:35; John 9:36; John 9:38; John 10:25; John 10:26; John 10:37; John 10:38; John 10:42; John 11:15; John 11:25; John 11:26; John 11:27; John 11:40; John 11:42; John 11:45; John 11:48; John 12:11; John 12:36; John 12:37; John 12:38; John 12:39; John 12:42; John 12:44; John 12:46; John 13:19; John 14:1; John 14:10; John 14:11; John 14:12; John 14:29; John 16:9; John 16:27; John 16:30; John 16:31; John 17:8; John 17:20; John 17:21; John 19:35; John 20:8; John 20:25; John 20:27; John 20:29; John 20:31; Acts 2:44; Acts 4:4; Acts 4:32; Acts 5:14; Acts 6:5; Acts 8:12; Acts 8:13; Acts 9:26; Acts 9:42; Acts 10:43; Acts 11:17; Acts 11:21; Acts 13:12; Acts 13:39; Acts 13:41; Acts 13:48; Acts 14:1; Acts 14:23; Acts 15:5; Acts 15:7; Acts 15:11; Acts 16:1; Acts 16:31; Acts 16:34; Acts 17:12; Acts 17:34; Acts 18:8; Acts 18:27; Acts 19:2; Acts 19:4; Acts 19:18; Acts 21:20; Acts 21:25; Acts 22:19; Acts 26:27; Romans 1:16; Romans 3:3; Romans 3:22; Romans 4:3; Romans 4:5; Romans 4:11; Romans 4:18; Romans 4:20; Romans 4:24; Romans 6:8; Romans 9:33; Romans 10:4; Romans 10:9; Romans 10:10; Romans 10:11; Romans 10:14; Romans 10:16; Romans 11:20; Romans 11:23; Romans 13:11; Romans 14:2; Romans 15:13; 1 Corinthians 1:21; 1 Corinthians 3:5; 1 Corinthians 6:1; 1 Corinthians 6:6; 1 Corinthians 7:12; 1 Corinthians 7:13; 1 Corinthians 7:14; 1 Corinthians 7:15; 1 Corinthians 9:5; 1 Corinthians 10:27; 1 Corinthians 11:18; 1 Corinthians 13:7; 1 Corinthians 14:22; 1 Corinthians 14:23; 1 Corinthians 14:24; 1 Corinthians 15:2; 1 Corinthians 15:11; 2 Corinthians 4:4; 2 Corinthians 4:13; 2 Corinthians 6:14; 2 Corinthians 6:15; Ephesians 1:13; Ephesians 1:19; Philippians 1:29; 1 Thessalonians 1:7; 1 Thessalonians 2:10; 1 Thessalonians 2:13; 1 Thessalonians 4:14; 2 Thessalonians 1:10; 2 Thessalonians 2:11; 2 Thessalonians 2:12; 2 Thessalonians 2:13; 1 Timothy 3:16; 1 Timothy 4:10; 1 Timothy 4:12; 1 Timothy 5:8; 1 Timothy 5:16; 1 Timothy 6:2; 2 Timothy 1:12; Titus 1:15; Titus 3:8; Hebrews 3:12; Hebrews 3:19; Hebrews 4:3; Hebrews 11:6; James 2:19; James 2:23; 1 Peter 1:8; 1 Peter 1:21; 1 Peter 2:6; 1 Peter 2:7; 1 John 3:23; 1 John 4:1; 1 John 4:16; 1 John 5:1; 1 John 5:5; 1 John 5:10; 1 John 5:13; Jude 1:5; Revelation 21:8; Acts 28:23-24; Mark 1:14-15; Job 9:16-18; Habakkuk 1:5-7; Mark 6:4-6
* **Associated Articles:** Apostle (ID: `26324@UWTranslationWords`); Believe (ID: `26381@UWTranslationWords`); Christian (ID: `26446@UWTranslationWords`); Disciple (ID: `26527@UWTranslationWords`); Faith (ID: `26583@UWTranslationWords`); Trust (ID: `27180@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Believe (ID: `keyterm:Believe`)

## Beloved (id: 26382)

beloved
=======

Definition:
-----------

The term “beloved” is an expression of affection that describes someone who is loved and dear to someone else.

* The term “beloved” literally means “loved (one)” or “(who is) loved.”
* God refers to Jesus as his “beloved Son.”
* In their letters to Christian churches, the apostles frequently address their fellow believers as “beloved.”

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* This term could also be translated as “loved” or “loved one” or “well\-loved,” or “very dear.”
* In the context of talking about a close friend, this could be translated as “my dear friend” or “my close friend.” In English it is natural to say “my dear friend, Paul” or “Paul, who is my dear friend.” Other languages may find it more natural to order this in a different way.
* Note that the word “beloved” comes from the word for God’s love, which is unconditional, unselfish, and sacrificial.

(See also: love)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Corinthians 4:14](https://ref.ly/1Cor4:14)
* [1 John 3:2](https://ref.ly/1John3:2)
* [1 John 4:7](https://ref.ly/1John4:7)
* [Mark 1:11](https://ref.ly/Mark1:11)
* [Mark 12:6](https://ref.ly/Mark12:6)
* [Revelation 20:9](https://ref.ly/Rev20:9)
* [Romans 16:8](https://ref.ly/Rom16:8)
* [Song of Songs 1:14](https://ref.ly/Song1:14)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0157, H1730, H2532, H3033, H3039, H4261, G00250, G00270, G52070

* **Associated Passages:** Nehemiah 13:26; Song of Songs 1:14; Matthew 3:17; Matthew 12:18; Matthew 17:5; Mark 1:11; Mark 9:7; Mark 12:6; Luke 3:22; Luke 20:13; Acts 15:25; Romans 1:7; Romans 11:28; Romans 12:19; Romans 16:5; Romans 16:8; Romans 16:9; Romans 16:12; 1 Corinthians 4:14; 1 Corinthians 4:17; 1 Corinthians 10:14; 1 Corinthians 15:58; 2 Corinthians 7:1; 2 Corinthians 12:19; Ephesians 5:1; Ephesians 6:21; Philippians 2:12; Philippians 4:1; Colossians 1:7; Colossians 4:7; Colossians 4:9; Colossians 4:14; 1 Thessalonians 2:8; 1 Timothy 6:2; 2 Timothy 1:2; Philemon 1:1; Philemon 1:16; Hebrews 6:9; James 1:16; James 1:19; James 2:5; 1 Peter 2:11; 1 Peter 4:12; 2 Peter 1:17; 2 Peter 3:1; 2 Peter 3:8; 2 Peter 3:14; 2 Peter 3:15; 2 Peter 3:17; 1 John 2:7; 1 John 3:2; 1 John 3:21; 1 John 4:1; 1 John 4:7; 1 John 4:11; 3 John 1:1; 3 John 1:2; 3 John 1:5; 3 John 1:11; Jude 1:1; Jude 1:3; Jude 1:17; Jude 1:20; Revelation 20:9
* **Associated Articles:** Love (ID: `26836@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Beloved (ID: `keyterm:Beloved`)

## Benaiah (id: 26383)

Benaiah
=======

Definition:
-----------

Benaiah was the name of several men in the Old Testament.

* Benaiah son of Jehoiada was one of David’s mighty men. He was a skilled warrior and was put in charge of David’s bodyguards.
* When Solomon was being made king, Benaiah helped him overthrow his enemies. He eventually became commander of the Israelite army.
* Other men in the Old Testament named Benaiah include three Levites: a priest, a musician, and a descendant of Asaph.

(See also: Asaph, Jehoiada, Levite, Solomon)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Chronicles 4:36](https://ref.ly/1Chr4:36)
* [1 Kings 1:8](https://ref.ly/1Kgs1:8)
* [2 Samuel 23:20–21](https://ref.ly/2Sam23:20-2Sam23:21)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1141

* **Associated Passages:** 1 Kings 1:8; 1 Chronicles 4:36; Ezra 10:25; Ezra 10:30; Ezra 10:35; Ezra 10:43; 2 Samuel 23:20-21
* **Associated Articles:** Asaph (ID: `26338@UWTranslationWords`); Jehoiada (ID: `26747@UWTranslationWords`); Levite (ID: `26825@UWTranslationWords`); Solomon (ID: `27107@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Benaiah (ID: `person:Benaiah.10`); Benaiah (ID: `person:Benaiah.11`); Benaiah (ID: `person:Benaiah.12`); Benaiah (ID: `person:Benaiah.2`); Benaiah (ID: `person:Benaiah.3`); Benaiah (ID: `person:Benaiah.4`); Benaiah (ID: `person:Benaiah.5`); Benaiah (ID: `person:Benaiah.6`); Benaiah (ID: `person:Benaiah.7`); Benaiah (ID: `person:Benaiah.8`); Benaiah (ID: `person:Benaiah.9`); Benaiah (ID: `person:Benaiah`)

## Benjamin (id: 26384)

Benjamin, Benjaminite
=====================

Facts:
------

Benjamin was Jacob’s twelfth son. He was Rachel’s second son. His descendants became one of the tribes of Israel.

* The tribe descended from him was known as the “tribe of Benjamin” or “Benjamin” or the “Benjaminites.”
* In Hebrew, the name Benjamin means “son of my right hand.”
* The tribe of Benjamin settled just northwest of the Dead Sea, north of Jerusalem.
* King Saul was from the tribe of Benjamin.
* The apostle Paul was from the tribe of Benjamin.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: twelve tribes of Israel, Jacob, Rachel)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Chronicles 2:1–2](https://ref.ly/1Chr2:1-1Chr2:2)
* [1 Kings 2:8](https://ref.ly/1Kgs2:8)
* [Acts 13:21–22](https://ref.ly/Acts13:21-Acts13:22)
* [Genesis 35:18](https://ref.ly/Gen35:18)
* [Genesis 42:4](https://ref.ly/Gen42:4)
* [Genesis 42:35–36](https://ref.ly/Gen42:35-Gen42:36)
* [Philippians 3:4–5](https://ref.ly/Phil3:4-Phil3:5)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1144, G09580

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 35:18; Genesis 35:24; Genesis 42:4; Genesis 42:36; Genesis 43:14; Genesis 43:15; Genesis 43:16; Genesis 43:29; Genesis 43:34; Genesis 44:12; Genesis 45:12; Genesis 45:14; Genesis 45:22; Genesis 46:19; Genesis 46:21; Genesis 49:27; Exodus 1:3; 1 Kings 2:8; Ezra 1:5; Ezra 4:1; Ezra 10:9; Ezra 10:32; Nehemiah 3:23; Nehemiah 11:4; Nehemiah 11:7; Nehemiah 11:31; Nehemiah 11:36; Nehemiah 12:34; Obadiah 1:19; Acts 13:21; Romans 11:1; Philippians 3:5; Revelation 7:8; 1 Chronicles 2:1-2; Acts 13:21-22; Genesis 42:35-36; Philippians 3:4-5
* **Associated Articles:** 12 Tribes of Israel (ID: `26274@UWTranslationWords`); Jacob (ID: `26739@UWTranslationWords`); Rachel (ID: `27007@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Benjamin (ID: `person:Benjamin.2`); Benjamin (ID: `person:Benjamin.3`); Benjamin (ID: `person:Benjamin.4`); Benjamin (ID: `person:Benjamin.5`); Benjamin (ID: `person:Benjamin`); Tribe of Benjamin (ID: `group:Benjamin`)

## Berea (id: 26385)

Berea
=====

Facts:
------

In New Testament times, Berea (or Beroea) was a prosperous Greek city in southeast Macedonia, about 80 kilometers south of Thessalonica.

* Paul and Silas fled to the city of Berea after their fellow Christians helped them escape from certain Jews who had caused trouble for them in Thessalonica.
* When the people living in Berea heard Paul preach, they researched the Scriptures to confirm that what he was telling them was true.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Macedonia, Paul, Silas, Thessalonica)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Acts 17:11](https://ref.ly/Acts17:11)
* [Acts 17:13–15](https://ref.ly/Acts17:13-Acts17:15)
* [Acts 20:4](https://ref.ly/Acts20:4)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: G09600

* **Associated Passages:** Acts 17:10; Acts 17:11; Acts 17:13; Acts 20:4; Acts 17:13-15
* **Associated Articles:** Macedonia (ID: `26844@UWTranslationWords`); Paul (ID: `26937@UWTranslationWords`); Silas (ID: `27094@UWTranslationWords`); Thessalonica (ID: `27153@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Berea (ID: `place:Berea`)

## Bethany (id: 26386)

Bethany
=======

Facts:
------

The town of Bethany was located at the base of the eastern slope of the Mount of Olives, about 2 miles east of Jerusalem.

* Bethany was near the road that ran between Jerusalem and Jericho.
* Jesus often visited Bethany where his close friends Lazarus, Martha, and Mary lived.
* Bethany is especially known as the place where Jesus raised Lazarus from the dead.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Jericho, Jerusalem, Lazarus, Martha, Mary (sister of Martha), Mount of Olives)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [John 1:26–28](https://ref.ly/John1:26-John1:28)
* [Luke 24:50–51](https://ref.ly/Luke24:50-Luke24:51)
* [Mark 11:1](https://ref.ly/Mark11:1)
* [Matthew 21:15–17](https://ref.ly/Matt21:15-Matt21:17)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: G09630

* **Associated Passages:** Matthew 21:17; Matthew 26:6; Mark 11:1; Mark 11:11; Mark 11:12; Mark 14:3; Luke 19:29; Luke 24:50; John 1:28; John 11:1; John 11:18; John 12:1; Luke 24:50-51; John 1:26-28; Matthew 21:15-17
* **Associated Articles:** Jericho (ID: `26754@UWTranslationWords`); Jerusalem (ID: `26756@UWTranslationWords`); Lazarus (ID: `26818@UWTranslationWords`); Martha (ID: `26855@UWTranslationWords`); Mary Sister of Martha (ID: `26858@UWTranslationWords`); Mount of Olives (ID: `26892@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Bethany (ID: `place:Bethany.2`); Bethany (ID: `place:Bethany`); Bethany Beyond the Jordan (ID: `place:Bethabara`)

## Bethel (id: 26387)

Bethel
======

Facts:
------

Bethel was a city located just north of Jerusalem in the land of Canaan. It was formerly called “Luz.”

* After receiving God’s promises for the first time, Abram (Abraham) built an altar to God near Bethel. The actual name of the city was not yet Bethel at that time, but it was usually referred to as “Bethel,” which was better known.
* When fleeing from his brother Esau, Jacob stayed overnight near this city and slept outdoors on the ground there. While he was sleeping, he had a dream showing angels going up and down a ladder to heaven.
* This city did not have the name “Bethel” until after Jacob named it that. To make this clear, some translations may translate it as “Luz (later called Bethel)” in the passages about Abraham, as well as when Jacob first arrives there (before he changed the name).
* Bethel is mentioned often in the Old Testament and was a place where many important events happened.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Abraham, altar, Jacob, Jerusalem)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Genesis 12:8–9](https://ref.ly/Gen12:8-Gen12:9)
* [Genesis 35:1](https://ref.ly/Gen35:1)
* [Hosea 10:15](https://ref.ly/Hos10:15)
* [Judges 1:23](https://ref.ly/Judg1:23)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1008

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 12:8; Genesis 13:3; Genesis 28:19; Genesis 31:13; Genesis 35:1; Genesis 35:3; Genesis 35:6; Genesis 35:7; Genesis 35:8; Genesis 35:15; Genesis 35:16; Judges 1:23; Ezra 2:28; Nehemiah 7:32; Nehemiah 11:31; Hosea 10:15; Genesis 12:8-9
* **Associated Articles:** Abraham (ID: `26282@UWTranslationWords`); Altar (ID: `26305@UWTranslationWords`); Jacob (ID: `26739@UWTranslationWords`); Jerusalem (ID: `26756@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Bethel (ID: `place:Bethel.2`); Bethel (ID: `place:Bethel`)

## Bethlehem (id: 26388)

Bethlehem, Ephrathah
====================

Facts:
------

Bethlehem was a small city in the land of Israel, near the city of Jerusalem. It was also known as “Ephrathah,” which was probably its original name.

* Bethlehem has been called the “city of David,” since King David was born there.
* The prophet Micah said that the Messiah would come from “Bethlehem Ephrathah.”
* Fulfilling that prophecy, Jesus was born in Bethlehem, many years later.
* The name “Bethlehem” means “house of bread” or “house of food.”

(See also: Caleb, David, Micah)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Genesis 35:16](https://ref.ly/Gen35:16)
* [John 7:42](https://ref.ly/John7:42)
* [Matthew 2:6](https://ref.ly/Matt2:6)
* [Matthew 2:16](https://ref.ly/Matt2:16)
* [Ruth 1:2](https://ref.ly/Ruth1:2)
* [Ruth 1:21](https://ref.ly/Ruth1:21)

Examples from the Bible stories:
--------------------------------

* **17:2** David was a shepherd from the town of **Bethlehem**.
* **21:9** The prophet Isaiah prophesied that the Messiah would be born from a virgin. The prophet Micah said that he would be born in the town of **Bethlehem**.
* **23:4** Joseph and Mary had to make a long journey from where they lived in Nazareth to **Bethlehem** because their ancestor was David whose hometown was **Bethlehem**.
* **23:6** “The Messiah, the Master, has been born in **Bethlehem**!”

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0376, H0672, H1035, G09650

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 35:16; Genesis 35:19; Ruth 1:1; Ruth 1:2; Ruth 1:19; Ruth 1:21; Ruth 1:22; Ruth 2:4; Ruth 4:11; Nehemiah 7:26; Matthew 2:1; Matthew 2:5; Matthew 2:6; Matthew 2:8; Matthew 2:16; Luke 2:4; Luke 2:15; John 7:42
* **Associated Articles:** Caleb (ID: `26424@UWTranslationWords`); David (ID: `26503@UWTranslationWords`); Micah (ID: `26874@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Bethlehem (ID: `place:Bethlehem.2`); Bethlehem (ID: `place:Bethlehem`)

## Bethshemesh (id: 26389)

Beth Shemesh
============

Facts:
------

Beth Shemesh was the name of a Canaanite city approximately 30 kilometers west of Jerusalem.

* The Israelites captured Beth Shemesh during the time of Joshua’s leadership.
* Beth Shemesh was a city that was set aside as a place for the Levite priests to live.
* When the Philistines were taking the captured ark of the covenant back to Jerusalem, Beth Shemesh was the first city where they stopped with it.

(Translation suggestions: Translate Names)

(See also: ark of the covenant, Canaan, Jerusalem, Joshua, Levite, Philistines)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Kings 4:9](https://ref.ly/1Kgs4:9)
* [1 Samuel 6:9](https://ref.ly/1Sam6:9)
* [Joshua 19:20–22](https://ref.ly/Josh19:20-Josh19:22)
* [Judges 1:33](https://ref.ly/Judg1:33)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1053

* **Associated Passages:** Judges 1:33; 1 Samuel 6:9; 1 Kings 4:9; Joshua 19:20-22
* **Associated Articles:** Ark of the Covenant (ID: `26333@UWTranslationWords`); Canaan (ID: `26430@UWTranslationWords`); Jerusalem (ID: `26756@UWTranslationWords`); Joshua (ID: `26778@UWTranslationWords`); Levite (ID: `26825@UWTranslationWords`); Philistines (ID: `26958@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Beth-shemesh (ID: `place:Beth-shemesh`); Beth-shemesh (ID: `place:Beth-shemesh.2`); Beth-shemesh (ID: `place:Beth-shemesh.3`)

## Bethuel (id: 26390)

Bethuel
=======

Facts:
------

Bethuel was the son of Abraham’s brother Nahor.

* Bethuel was the father of Rebekah and Laban.
* There was also a town called Bethuel, which may have been located in southern Judah, not far from the town of Beersheba.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Beersheba, Laban, Nahor, Rebekah)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Chronicles 4:30](https://ref.ly/1Chr4:30)
* [Genesis 28:2](https://ref.ly/Gen28:2)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1328

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 22:22; Genesis 22:23; Genesis 24:15; Genesis 24:24; Genesis 24:47; Genesis 24:50; Genesis 25:20; Genesis 28:2; Genesis 28:5; 1 Chronicles 4:30
* **Associated Articles:** Beersheba (ID: `26377@UWTranslationWords`); Laban (ID: `26806@UWTranslationWords`); Nahor (ID: `26898@UWTranslationWords`); Rebekah (ID: `27014@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Bethuel (ID: `person:Bethuel`); Bethuel (ID: `place:Bethuel`)

## Betray (id: 26391)

betray, betrayer
================

Definition:
-----------

The term “betray” means to act in a way that deceives and harms someone. A “betrayer” is a person who betrays a friend who was trusting him.

* Judas was “the betrayer” because he told the Jewish leaders how to capture Jesus.
* The betrayal by Judas was especially evil because he was an apostle of Jesus who received money in exchange for giving the Jewish leaders information that would result in Jesus’ unjust death.

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* Depending on the context, the term “betray” could be translated as “deceive and cause harm to” or “turn over to the enemy” or “treat treacherously.”
* The term “betrayer” could be translated as “person who betrays” or “double dealer” or “traitor.”

(See also: Judas Iscariot, Jewish leaders, apostle)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Acts 7:52](https://ref.ly/Acts7:52)
* [John 6:64](https://ref.ly/John6:64)
* [John 13:22](https://ref.ly/John13:22)
* [Matthew 10:4](https://ref.ly/Matt10:4)
* [Matthew 26:22](https://ref.ly/Matt26:22)

Examples from the Bible stories:
--------------------------------

* **21:11** Other prophets foretold that those who killed the Messiah would gamble for his clothes and he would be **betrayed** by a friend. The prophet Zechariah foretold that the friend would be paid thirty silver coins as payment for **betraying** the Messiah.
* **38:2** After Jesus and the disciples arrived in Jerusalem, Judas went to the Jewish leaders and offered to **betray** Jesus to them in exchange for money.
* **38:3** The Jewish leaders, led by the high priest, paid Judas thirty silver coins to **betray** Jesus.
* **38:6** Then Jesus said to the disciples, “One of you will **betray** me.” \* \* **38:6** Jesus said, “The person to whom I give this piece of bread is the **betrayer**.”
* **38:13** When he returned the third time, Jesus said, “Wake up! My **betrayer** is here.”
* **38:14** Then Jesus said, “Judas, do you **betray** me with a kiss?”
* **39:8** Meanwhile, Judas, the **betrayer**, saw that the Jewish leaders had condemned Jesus to die. He became full of sorrow and went away and killed himself.

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H7411, G38600, G42730

* **Associated Passages:** Matthew 10:4; Matthew 24:10; Matthew 26:15; Matthew 26:16; Matthew 26:21; Matthew 26:22; Matthew 26:23; Matthew 26:24; Matthew 26:25; Matthew 26:45; Matthew 26:46; Matthew 26:48; Matthew 27:3; Matthew 27:4; Mark 3:19; Mark 14:10; Mark 14:11; Mark 14:18; Mark 14:21; Mark 14:41; Mark 14:42; Mark 14:44; Luke 6:16; John 6:64; John 6:71; John 12:4; John 13:2; John 13:11; John 13:21; John 13:22; John 18:2; John 18:5; John 21:20; Acts 7:52; 1 Corinthians 11:23; 2 Timothy 3:4
* **Associated Articles:** Apostle (ID: `26324@UWTranslationWords`); Jewish Leaders (ID: `26761@UWTranslationWords`); Judas Iscariot (ID: `26784@UWTranslationWords`)


## Biblical Time Day (id: 26392)

day
===

Definition:
-----------

The term “day” generally refers to the time it takes for the alternating periods of light and darkness in the sky to complete one cycle (that is, 24 hours). However, in the Bible the same term is often used to refer to a shorter period of time (such as the time between sunrise and sunset) or a longer period of time that is often not specified.

* “Day” is sometimes used in contrast to “night.” In these cases, the term refers to the period of time when the sky is light.
* The term may also refer to a specific point in time, such as “today.”
* Sometimes the term “day” is used figuratively to refer to a longer period of time, such as the “day of Yahweh” or “last days.” Some languages will use a different expression to translate these figurative uses or will translate “day” non\-figuratively.

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* It is best to translate this term literally as “day” or “daytime” using the word in your language that refers to the part of the day when there is light.
* Other translations of “day” could include “daytime,” “time,” “season,” “occasion” or “event,” depending on the context.

(See also: time, judgment day, last day)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Acts 20:6](https://ref.ly/Acts20:6)
* [Daniel 10:4](https://ref.ly/Dan10:4)
* [Ezra 6:15](https://ref.ly/Ezra6:15)
* [Ezra 6:19](https://ref.ly/Ezra6:19)
* [Matthew 9:15](https://ref.ly/Matt9:15)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H3117, H3118, H6242, G22500

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 1:5; Genesis 1:8; Genesis 1:13; Genesis 1:14; Genesis 1:16; Genesis 1:18; Genesis 1:19; Genesis 1:23; Genesis 1:31; Genesis 2:2; Genesis 2:3; Genesis 2:4; Genesis 2:17; Genesis 3:5; Genesis 3:8; Genesis 3:14; Genesis 3:17; Genesis 4:3; Genesis 4:14; Genesis 5:1; Genesis 5:2; Genesis 5:4; Genesis 5:5; Genesis 5:8; Genesis 5:11; Genesis 5:14; Genesis 5:17; Genesis 5:20; Genesis 5:23; Genesis 5:27; Genesis 5:31; Genesis 6:3; Genesis 6:4; Genesis 6:5; Genesis 7:4; Genesis 7:10; Genesis 7:11; Genesis 7:12; Genesis 7:13; Genesis 7:17; Genesis 7:24; Genesis 8:3; Genesis 8:4; Genesis 8:6; Genesis 8:10; Genesis 8:12; Genesis 8:14; Genesis 8:22; Genesis 9:29; Genesis 10:25; Genesis 11:32; Genesis 14:1; Genesis 15:18; Genesis 17:12; Genesis 17:23; Genesis 17:26; Genesis 18:1; Genesis 19:37; Genesis 19:38; Genesis 21:4; Genesis 21:8; Genesis 21:26; Genesis 21:34; Genesis 22:4; Genesis 22:14; Genesis 24:1; Genesis 24:12; Genesis 24:42; Genesis 24:55; Genesis 25:7; Genesis 25:24; Genesis 25:31; Genesis 25:33; Genesis 26:1; Genesis 26:8; Genesis 26:15; Genesis 26:18; Genesis 26:32; Genesis 26:33; Genesis 27:2; Genesis 27:41; Genesis 27:44; Genesis 27:45; Genesis 29:7; Genesis 29:14; Genesis 29:20; Genesis 29:21; Genesis 30:14; Genesis 30:32; Genesis 30:33; Genesis 30:35; Genesis 30:36; Genesis 31:22; Genesis 31:23; Genesis 31:39; Genesis 31:40; Genesis 31:43; Genesis 31:48; Genesis 32:32; Genesis 33:16; Genesis 34:25; Genesis 35:3; Genesis 35:20; Genesis 35:28; Genesis 35:29; Genesis 37:34; Genesis 38:12; Genesis 39:10; Genesis 39:11; Genesis 40:4; Genesis 40:7; Genesis 40:12; Genesis 40:13; Genesis 40:18; Genesis 40:19; Genesis 40:20; Genesis 41:1; Genesis 41:9; Genesis 42:13; Genesis 42:17; Genesis 42:18; Genesis 42:32; Genesis 43:9; Genesis 44:32; Genesis 47:8; Genesis 47:9; Genesis 47:23; Genesis 47:26; Genesis 47:28; Genesis 47:29; Genesis 48:15; Genesis 48:20; Genesis 49:1; Genesis 50:3; Genesis 50:4; Genesis 50:10; Genesis 50:20; Exodus 2:11; Exodus 2:13; Exodus 2:23; Exodus 3:18; Exodus 5:3; Exodus 5:6; Exodus 5:13; Exodus 5:14; Exodus 5:19; Exodus 6:28; Exodus 7:25; Exodus 8:22; Exodus 8:27; Exodus 9:18; Exodus 10:6; Exodus 10:13; Exodus 10:22; Exodus 10:23; Exodus 10:28; Exodus 12:6; Exodus 12:14; Exodus 12:15; Exodus 12:16; Exodus 12:17; Exodus 12:18; Exodus 12:19; Exodus 12:41; Exodus 12:51; Exodus 13:3; Exodus 13:4; Exodus 13:6; Exodus 13:7; Exodus 13:8; Exodus 13:10; Exodus 13:21; Exodus 13:22; Exodus 14:13; Exodus 14:30; Exodus 15:22; Exodus 16:1; Exodus 16:4; Exodus 16:5; Exodus 16:22; Exodus 16:25; Exodus 16:26; Exodus 16:27; Exodus 16:29; Exodus 16:30; Exodus 19:1; Exodus 19:10; Exodus 19:11; Exodus 19:15; Exodus 19:16; Exodus 20:8; Exodus 20:9; Exodus 20:10; Exodus 20:11; Exodus 20:12; Exodus 21:21; Exodus 22:30; Exodus 23:12; Exodus 23:15; Exodus 23:26; Exodus 24:16; Exodus 24:18; Exodus 29:30; Exodus 29:35; Exodus 29:36; Exodus 29:37; Exodus 29:38; Exodus 31:15; Exodus 31:17; Exodus 32:28; Exodus 32:29; Exodus 32:34; Exodus 34:11; Exodus 34:18; Exodus 34:21; Exodus 34:28; Exodus 35:2; Exodus 35:3; Exodus 40:2; Ezra 6:15; Ezra 6:19; Proverbs 3:2; Proverbs 3:16; Proverbs 4:18; Proverbs 6:23; Proverbs 6:34; Proverbs 7:9; Proverbs 7:14; Proverbs 7:20; Proverbs 8:30; Proverbs 8:34; Proverbs 9:11; Proverbs 10:27; Proverbs 11:4; Proverbs 12:16; Proverbs 15:15; Proverbs 16:4; Proverbs 21:26; Proverbs 21:31; Proverbs 22:19; Proverbs 23:17; Proverbs 24:10; Proverbs 25:13; Proverbs 25:19; Proverbs 25:20; Proverbs 27:1; Proverbs 27:10; Proverbs 27:15; Proverbs 28:16; Proverbs 31:12; Proverbs 31:25; Daniel 10:4; Matthew 2:1; Matthew 3:1; Matthew 4:2; Matthew 6:34; Matthew 7:22; Matthew 9:15; Matthew 10:15; Matthew 11:12; Matthew 11:22; Matthew 11:24; Matthew 12:36; Matthew 12:40; Matthew 13:1; Matthew 15:32; Matthew 16:21; Matthew 17:1; Matthew 17:23; Matthew 20:2; Matthew 20:6; Matthew 20:12; Matthew 20:19; Matthew 22:23; Matthew 22:46; Matthew 23:30; Matthew 24:19; Matthew 24:22; Matthew 24:29; Matthew 24:36; Matthew 24:37; Matthew 24:38; Matthew 24:42; Matthew 24:50; Matthew 25:13; Matthew 26:2; Matthew 26:29; Matthew 26:55; Matthew 26:61; Matthew 27:40; Matthew 27:63; Matthew 27:64; Matthew 28:20; Mark 1:9; Mark 1:13; Mark 2:1; Mark 2:20; Mark 4:27; Mark 4:35; Mark 5:5; Mark 6:21; Mark 8:1; Mark 8:2; Mark 8:31; Mark 9:2; Mark 9:31; Mark 10:34; Mark 13:17; Mark 13:19; Mark 13:20; Mark 13:24; Mark 13:32; Mark 14:1; Mark 14:12; Mark 14:25; Mark 14:49; Mark 14:58; Mark 15:29; Luke 1:5; Luke 1:7; Luke 1:18; Luke 1:20; Luke 1:23; Luke 1:24; Luke 1:25; Luke 1:39; Luke 1:59; Luke 1:75; Luke 1:80; Luke 2:1; Luke 2:6; Luke 2:21; Luke 2:22; Luke 2:36; Luke 2:37; Luke 2:43; Luke 2:44; Luke 2:46; Luke 4:2; Luke 4:16; Luke 4:25; Luke 4:42; Luke 5:17; Luke 5:35; Luke 6:12; Luke 6:13; Luke 6:23; Luke 8:22; Luke 9:12; Luke 9:22; Luke 9:23; Luke 9:28; Luke 9:36; Luke 9:37; Luke 9:51; Luke 10:12; Luke 11:3; Luke 12:46; Luke 13:14; Luke 13:16; Luke 14:5; Luke 15:13; Luke 16:19; Luke 17:4; Luke 17:22; Luke 17:26; Luke 17:27; Luke 17:28; Luke 17:29; Luke 17:30; Luke 17:31; Luke 18:7; Luke 18:33; Luke 19:42; Luke 19:43; Luke 19:47; Luke 20:1; Luke 21:6; Luke 21:22; Luke 21:23; Luke 21:34; Luke 21:37; Luke 22:7; Luke 22:53; Luke 22:66; Luke 23:7; Luke 23:12; Luke 23:29; Luke 23:54; Luke 24:7; Luke 24:13; Luke 24:18; Luke 24:21; Luke 24:29; Luke 24:46; John 1:39; John 2:1; John 2:12; John 2:19; John 2:20; John 4:40; John 4:43; John 5:9; John 6:39; John 6:40; John 6:44; John 6:54; John 7:37; John 8:56; John 9:4; John 9:14; John 11:6; John 11:9; John 11:17; John 11:24; John 11:53; John 12:1; John 12:7; John 12:48; John 14:20; John 16:23; John 16:26; John 19:31; John 20:19; John 20:26; Acts 1:2; Acts 1:3; Acts 1:5; Acts 1:15; Acts 1:22; Acts 2:1; Acts 2:15; Acts 2:17; Acts 2:18; Acts 2:20; Acts 2:29; Acts 2:41; Acts 2:46; Acts 2:47; Acts 3:2; Acts 3:24; Acts 5:36; Acts 5:37; Acts 5:42; Acts 6:1; Acts 7:8; Acts 7:26; Acts 7:41; Acts 7:45; Acts 8:1; Acts 9:9; Acts 9:19; Acts 9:23; Acts 9:24; Acts 9:37; Acts 9:43; Acts 10:3; Acts 10:30; Acts 10:40; Acts 10:48; Acts 11:27; Acts 12:3; Acts 12:18; Acts 12:21; Acts 13:14; Acts 13:31; Acts 13:41; Acts 15:7; Acts 15:36; Acts 16:5; Acts 16:12; Acts 16:13; Acts 16:18; Acts 16:35; Acts 17:11; Acts 17:17; Acts 17:31; Acts 18:18; Acts 19:9; Acts 20:6; Acts 20:16; Acts 20:18; Acts 20:26; Acts 20:31; Acts 21:4; Acts 21:5; Acts 21:7; Acts 21:10; Acts 21:15; Acts 21:26; Acts 21:27; Acts 21:38; Acts 23:1; Acts 23:12; Acts 24:1; Acts 24:11; Acts 24:24; Acts 25:1; Acts 25:6; Acts 25:13; Acts 25:14; Acts 26:7; Acts 26:13; Acts 26:22; Acts 27:7; Acts 27:20; Acts 27:29; Acts 27:33; Acts 27:39; Acts 28:7; Acts 28:12; Acts 28:13; Acts 28:14; Acts 28:17; Acts 28:23; Romans 2:5; Romans 2:16; Romans 8:36; Romans 10:21; Romans 11:8; Romans 13:12; Romans 13:13; Romans 14:5; Romans 14:6; 1 Corinthians 1:8; 1 Corinthians 3:13; 1 Corinthians 5:5; 1 Corinthians 10:8; 1 Corinthians 15:4; 1 Corinthians 15:31; 2 Corinthians 1:14; 2 Corinthians 3:14; 2 Corinthians 3:15; 2 Corinthians 4:16; 2 Corinthians 6:2; 2 Corinthians 11:28; Ephesians 4:30; Ephesians 5:16; Ephesians 6:13; Philippians 1:5; Colossians 1:6; Colossians 1:9; 1 Thessalonians 2:9; 1 Thessalonians 3:10; 1 Thessalonians 5:2; 1 Thessalonians 5:4; 1 Thessalonians 5:5; 1 Thessalonians 5:8; 2 Thessalonians 1:10; 2 Thessalonians 2:2; 2 Thessalonians 3:8; 1 Timothy 5:5; 2 Timothy 1:3; 2 Timothy 1:12; 2 Timothy 1:18; 2 Timothy 3:1; 2 Timothy 4:8; Hebrews 1:2; Hebrews 3:8; Hebrews 3:13; Hebrews 4:4; Hebrews 4:7; Hebrews 4:8; Hebrews 5:7; Hebrews 7:3; Hebrews 7:27; Hebrews 8:8; Hebrews 8:9; Hebrews 8:10; Hebrews 10:11; Hebrews 10:16; Hebrews 10:25; Hebrews 10:32; Hebrews 11:30; Hebrews 12:10; James 5:3; James 5:5; 1 Peter 2:12; 1 Peter 3:10; 1 Peter 3:20; 2 Peter 1:19; 2 Peter 2:8; 2 Peter 2:9; 2 Peter 2:13; 2 Peter 3:3; 2 Peter 3:7; 2 Peter 3:8; 2 Peter 3:10; 2 Peter 3:12; 2 Peter 3:18; 1 John 4:17; Jude 1:6; Revelation 1:10; Revelation 2:10; Revelation 2:13; Revelation 4:8; Revelation 6:17; Revelation 7:15; Revelation 8:12; Revelation 9:6; Revelation 9:15; Revelation 10:7; Revelation 11:3; Revelation 11:6; Revelation 11:9; Revelation 11:11; Revelation 12:6; Revelation 12:10; Revelation 14:11; Revelation 16:14; Revelation 18:8; Revelation 20:10; Revelation 21:25
* **Associated Articles:** Day of Judgment (ID: `26789@UWTranslationWords`); Lastday (ID: `26814@UWTranslationWords`); Time (ID: `27161@UWTranslationWords`)


## Biblical Time Hour (id: 26393)

hour, moment, immediately, for a while
======================================

Definition:
-----------

The term “hour” is often used in the Bible to tell what time of day a certain event took place. It is also used figuratively to mean “time” or “moment.”

* The Jews counted daylight hours starting at sunrise (around 6 AM). For example, “the ninth hour” meant “around three in the afternoon.”
* Nighttime hours were counted starting at sunset (around 6 PM). For example, “the third hour of the night” meant “around nine in the evening” in our present\-day system..
* Since references to time in the Bible will not correspond exactly to the present\-day time system, phrases such as “around nine” or “about six o’clock” could be used.
* Some translations might add phrases like “in the evening” or “in the morning” or “in the afternoon” to make it clear what time of day is being talked about.
* The phrase, “in that hour” could be translated as “at that time” or “in that moment.”
* Referring to Jesus, the expression “his hour had come” could be translated as “the time had come for him to” or “the appointed time for him had come.”

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Acts 2:15](https://ref.ly/Acts2:15)
* [John 4:51–52](https://ref.ly/John4:51-John4:52)
* [Luke 23:44](https://ref.ly/Luke23:44)
* [Matthew 20:3](https://ref.ly/Matt20:3)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H8160, G56100

* **Associated Passages:** Matthew 20:3; Matthew 20:5; Matthew 20:9; Matthew 20:12; Matthew 26:40; Matthew 27:45; Matthew 27:46; Mark 15:25; Mark 15:33; Mark 15:34; Luke 22:59; Luke 23:44; John 1:39; John 4:6; John 4:52; John 4:53; John 11:9; John 19:14; Acts 2:15; Acts 3:1; Acts 5:7; Acts 10:3; Acts 10:9; Acts 10:30; Acts 19:34; Acts 23:23; Romans 13:11; John 4:51-52


## Biblical Time Month (id: 26394)

month, monthly
==============

Definition:
-----------

The term “month” refers to a period of time lasting about four weeks. The number of days in each month varies depending on whether a lunar or solar calendar is used.

* In the lunar calendar, the length of each month is based on the amount of time it takes for the moon to go around the earth, about twenty\-nine days. In this system there are twelve or thirteen months in a year. Despite the year being twelve or thirteen months, the first month is always called the same name even though it may be a different season.
* The “new moon,” or beginning phase of the moon with its sliver of light, marks the beginning of each month in the lunar calendar.
* All the names of months referred to in the Bible are those of the lunar calendar since this was the system used by the Israelites. Modern Jews still use this calendar for religious purposes.
* The modern\-day solar calendar is based on how long it takes the earth to go around the sun (about 365 days). In this system, the year is always divided up into twelve months, with the length of each month ranging from twenty\-eight to thirty\-one days.

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Samuel 20:34](https://ref.ly/1Sam20:34)
* [Acts 18:9–11](https://ref.ly/Acts18:9-Acts18:11)
* [Hebrews 11:23](https://ref.ly/Heb11:23)
* [Numbers 10:10](https://ref.ly/Num10:10)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H2320, H3391, H3393, G33760

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 7:11; Genesis 8:4; Genesis 8:5; Genesis 8:13; Genesis 8:14; Genesis 29:14; Genesis 38:24; Exodus 2:2; Exodus 12:2; Exodus 12:3; Exodus 12:6; Exodus 12:18; Exodus 13:4; Exodus 13:5; Exodus 16:1; Exodus 19:1; Exodus 23:15; Exodus 34:18; Exodus 40:2; Exodus 40:17; Numbers 10:10; 1 Samuel 20:34; Nehemiah 2:1; Nehemiah 7:73; Nehemiah 8:2; Nehemiah 8:14; Nehemiah 9:1; Luke 1:24; Luke 1:26; Luke 1:36; Luke 1:56; Luke 4:25; Acts 7:20; Acts 18:11; Acts 19:8; Acts 20:3; Acts 28:11; Hebrews 11:23; James 5:17; Revelation 9:5; Revelation 9:10; Revelation 9:15; Revelation 11:2; Revelation 13:5; Revelation 22:2; Acts 18:9-11


## Biblical Time Watch (id: 26395)

watch (biblical time)
=====================

Definition:
-----------

In biblical times, a “watch” was a period of time at night during which a watchman or guard for a city would be on duty looking out for any danger from an enemy.

* In the Old Testament, the Israelites had three watches which were called “beginning” (sunset to 10 PM), “middle” (10 PM to 2 AM), and “morning” (2 AM to sunrise) watches.
* In the New Testament, the Jews followed the Roman system and had four watches, named simply “first” (sunset to 9 PM), “second” (9 PM to 12 midnight), “third” (12 midnight to 3 AM), and “fourth” (3 AM to sunrise) watches.
* These could also be translated with more general expressions such as “late evening” or “middle of the night” or “very early in the morning,” depending on which watch is being referred to.

(See also: watch)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Luke 12:37–38](https://ref.ly/Luke12:37-Luke12:38)
* [Mark 6:48–50](https://ref.ly/Mark6:48-Mark6:50)
* [Matthew 14:25–27](https://ref.ly/Matt14:25-Matt14:27)
* [Psalms 90:3–4](https://ref.ly/Ps90:3-Ps90:4)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0821, G54380

* **Associated Passages:** Mark 6:48; Luke 12:38; Luke 12:37-38; Mark 6:48-50; Matthew 14:25-27; Psalms 90:3-4
* **Associated Articles:** Watch (ID: `27200@UWTranslationWords`)


## Biblical Time Week (id: 26396)

week
====

Definition:
-----------

The term “week” literally refers to a period of time lasting seven days.

* In the Jewish system of counting time, a week begins at sunset on Saturday and ends at sunset the following Saturday.
* In the Bible, the term “week” is sometimes used figuratively to refer to a group of seven units of time, such as seven years.
* The “Festival of Weeks” is a celebration of harvest that takes place seven weeks after Passover. It is also called “Pentecost.”

(See also: Pentecost)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Acts 20:7–8](https://ref.ly/Acts20:7-Acts20:8)
* [Deuteronomy 16:9](https://ref.ly/Deut16:9)
* [Leviticus 23:15–16](https://ref.ly/Lev23:15-Lev23:16)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H7620, G45210

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 29:27; Genesis 29:28; Deuteronomy 16:9; Acts 20:7-8; Leviticus 23:15-16
* **Associated Articles:** Pentecost (ID: `26940@UWTranslationWords`)


## Biblical Time Year (id: 26397)

year
====

Definition:
-----------

When used literally, the term “year” in the Bible refers to a period of time lasting 354 days. This is according to the lunar calendar system which is based on the time it takes for the moon to go around the earth.

* A year in the modern\-day solar calendar lasts 365 days divided into twelve months, based on the amount of time it takes for the earth to travel around the sun.
* In both calendar systems a year has twelve months. But an extra thirteenth month is sometimes added to the year in the lunar calendar to make up for the fact that a lunar year is eleven days less than a solar year. This helps keep the two calendars more in line with each other.
* In the Bible, the term “year” is also used in a figurative sense to refer to a general time when a special event takes place. Examples of this include, “the year of Yahweh” or “in the year of drought” or “the favorable year of the Lord.” In these contexts, “year” could be translated as “time” or “season” or “time period.”

(See also: month)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [2 Kings 23:31](https://ref.ly/2Kgs23:31)
* [Acts 19:8–10](https://ref.ly/Acts19:8-Acts19:10)
* [Daniel 8:1](https://ref.ly/Dan8:1)
* [Exodus 12:2](https://ref.ly/Exod12:2)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H3117, H7620, H7657, H8140, H8141, G17630, G20940

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 1:14; Genesis 5:3; Genesis 5:4; Genesis 5:5; Genesis 5:6; Genesis 5:7; Genesis 5:8; Genesis 5:9; Genesis 5:10; Genesis 5:11; Genesis 5:12; Genesis 5:13; Genesis 5:14; Genesis 5:15; Genesis 5:16; Genesis 5:17; Genesis 5:18; Genesis 5:19; Genesis 5:20; Genesis 5:21; Genesis 5:22; Genesis 5:23; Genesis 5:25; Genesis 5:26; Genesis 5:27; Genesis 5:28; Genesis 5:30; Genesis 5:31; Genesis 5:32; Genesis 6:3; Genesis 7:6; Genesis 7:11; Genesis 8:13; Genesis 9:28; Genesis 9:29; Genesis 11:10; Genesis 11:11; Genesis 11:12; Genesis 11:13; Genesis 11:14; Genesis 11:15; Genesis 11:16; Genesis 11:17; Genesis 11:18; Genesis 11:19; Genesis 11:20; Genesis 11:21; Genesis 11:22; Genesis 11:23; Genesis 11:24; Genesis 11:25; Genesis 11:26; Genesis 11:32; Genesis 12:4; Genesis 14:4; Genesis 14:5; Genesis 15:13; Genesis 16:3; Genesis 16:16; Genesis 17:1; Genesis 17:17; Genesis 17:21; Genesis 17:24; Genesis 17:25; Genesis 21:5; Genesis 23:1; Genesis 25:7; Genesis 25:17; Genesis 25:20; Genesis 25:26; Genesis 26:12; Genesis 26:34; Genesis 29:18; Genesis 29:20; Genesis 29:27; Genesis 29:30; Genesis 31:38; Genesis 31:41; Genesis 35:28; Genesis 37:2; Genesis 41:1; Genesis 41:26; Genesis 41:27; Genesis 41:29; Genesis 41:30; Genesis 41:34; Genesis 41:35; Genesis 41:36; Genesis 41:46; Genesis 41:47; Genesis 41:48; Genesis 41:50; Genesis 41:53; Genesis 41:54; Genesis 45:6; Genesis 45:11; Genesis 47:8; Genesis 47:9; Genesis 47:17; Genesis 47:18; Genesis 47:28; Genesis 50:22; Genesis 50:26; Exodus 6:16; Exodus 6:18; Exodus 6:20; Exodus 12:2; Exodus 12:5; Exodus 12:40; Exodus 12:41; Exodus 23:16; Exodus 23:29; Exodus 29:38; Exodus 30:10; Exodus 34:22; Exodus 34:24; 2 Kings 23:31; Proverbs 3:2; Proverbs 4:10; Proverbs 5:9; Proverbs 9:11; Proverbs 10:27; Daniel 8:1; Matthew 9:20; Mark 5:25; Mark 5:42; Luke 2:36; Luke 2:37; Luke 2:41; Luke 2:42; Luke 3:1; Luke 3:23; Luke 4:19; Luke 4:25; Luke 8:42; Luke 8:43; Luke 12:19; Luke 13:7; Luke 13:8; Luke 13:11; Luke 13:16; Luke 15:29; John 2:20; John 5:5; John 8:57; John 11:49; John 11:51; Acts 4:22; Acts 7:6; Acts 7:30; Acts 7:36; Acts 7:42; Acts 9:33; Acts 11:26; Acts 13:20; Acts 13:21; Acts 18:11; Acts 19:10; Acts 24:10; Acts 24:17; Romans 15:23; 2 Corinthians 12:2; Hebrews 1:12; Hebrews 3:10; Hebrews 3:17; Hebrews 9:7; Hebrews 9:25; Hebrews 10:1; Hebrews 10:3; James 4:13; 2 Peter 3:8; Revelation 9:15; Revelation 20:2; Revelation 20:3; Revelation 20:4; Revelation 20:5; Revelation 20:6; Revelation 20:7; Acts 19:8-10
* **Associated Articles:** Biblical Time Month (ID: `26394@UWTranslationWords`)


## Bilhah (id: 26398)

Bilhah
======

Facts:
------

Bilhah was one of Jacob’s wives. She gave birth to Dan and Naphtali, two sons of Jacob whose descendants became tribes of Israel.

* Laban gave Bilhah to Rachel as a servant when Rachel married Jacob.
* Because Rachel was not having children, she gave Bilhah to Jacob as a wife in order to produce children for her.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Jacob, Rachel, Dan, Naphtali)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Genesis 29:29](https://ref.ly/Gen29:29)
* [Genesis 30:4](https://ref.ly/Gen30:4)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1090

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 29:29; Genesis 30:3; Genesis 30:4; Genesis 30:5; Genesis 30:7; Genesis 35:22; Genesis 35:25; Genesis 37:2; Genesis 46:25
* **Associated Articles:** Dan (ID: `26499@UWTranslationWords`); Jacob (ID: `26739@UWTranslationWords`); Naphtali (ID: `26900@UWTranslationWords`); Rachel (ID: `27007@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Bilhah (ID: `person:Bilhah`); Bilhah (ID: `place:Bilhah`)

## Birthright (id: 26399)

birthright
==========

Definition:
-----------

The term “birthright” in the Bible refers to the honor, family name, and physical wealth that was normally given to the firstborn son in a family.

* The birthright of the firstborn son included a double portion of the father’s inheritance.
* A king’s firstborn son was normally given the birthright to rule after his father died.
* Esau sold his birthright to his younger brother Jacob. Because of this, Jacob inherited the blessing of the firstborn instead of Esau.
* The birthright also included the honor of having the family descendants traced through the firstborn son’s line.

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* Possible ways to translate “birthright” could include, “rights and wealth of the firstborn son” or “family honor” or “privilege and inheritance of the firstborn.”

(See also: firstborn, inherit, descendant)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Chronicles 5:1](https://ref.ly/1Chr5:1)
* [Genesis 25:34](https://ref.ly/Gen25:34)
* [Genesis 43:33](https://ref.ly/Gen43:33)
* [Hebrews 12:14–17](https://ref.ly/Heb12:14-Heb12:17)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1062, G44150

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 25:31; Genesis 25:32; Genesis 25:33; Genesis 25:34; Genesis 27:36; Genesis 43:33; 1 Chronicles 5:1; Hebrews 12:16; Hebrews 12:14-17
* **Associated Articles:** Descendant (ID: `26518@UWTranslationWords`); First Born (ID: `26600@UWTranslationWords`); Inherit (ID: `26725@UWTranslationWords`)


## Blameless (id: 26400)

blameless
=========

Definition:
-----------

The term “blameless” literally means “without blame.” It is used to refer to a person who obeys God wholeheartedly, but it does not mean that the person is sinless.

* Abraham and Noah were considered blameless before God.
* A person who has a reputation for being “blameless” behaves in a way that honors God.
* According to one verse, a person who is blameless is “one who fears God and turns away from evil.”

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* This could also be translated as “with no fault to his character” or “completely obedient to God” or “avoiding sin” or “keeping away from evil.”

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Thessalonians 2:10](https://ref.ly/1Thess2:10)
* [1 Thessalonians 3:11–13](https://ref.ly/1Thess3:11-1Thess3:13)
* [2 Peter 3:14](https://ref.ly/2Pet3:14)
* [Colossians 1:22](https://ref.ly/Col1:22)
* [Genesis 17:1–2](https://ref.ly/Gen17:1-Gen17:2)
* [Philippians 2:15](https://ref.ly/Phil2:15)
* [Philippians 3:6](https://ref.ly/Phil3:6)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H5352, H5355, H8535, G02730, G02740, G02980, G02990, G03380, G04100, G04230

* **Associated Passages:** Proverbs 2:21; Proverbs 11:5; Proverbs 11:20; Proverbs 13:6; Proverbs 28:18; Proverbs 29:10; Luke 1:6; Acts 24:16; 1 Corinthians 1:8; 1 Corinthians 10:32; Ephesians 1:4; Ephesians 5:27; Philippians 1:10; Philippians 2:15; Philippians 3:6; Colossians 1:22; 1 Thessalonians 2:10; 1 Thessalonians 3:13; 1 Thessalonians 5:23; 1 Timothy 3:10; 1 Timothy 5:7; Titus 1:6; Titus 1:7; Hebrews 8:7; Hebrews 9:14; 2 Peter 3:14; Revelation 14:5; 1 Thessalonians 3:11-13; Genesis 17:1-2

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Unblemished (ID: `keyterm:Unblemished`); Without Reproach (ID: `keyterm:WithoutReproach`); Complete (ID: `keyterm:Complete`); Be Blameless (ID: `keyterm:Blameless`)

## Blasphemy (id: 26401)

blasphemy, blaspheme, blasphemous
=================================

Definition:
-----------

In the Bible, the term “blasphemy” refers to speaking in a way that shows a deep disrespect for God or people. To “blaspheme” someone is to speak against that person so that others think something false or bad about him.

* Most often, to blaspheme God means to slander or insult him by saying things that are not true about him or by behaving in an immoral way that dishonors him.
* It is blasphemy for a human being to claim to be God or to claim that there is a God other than the one true God.
* Some English versions translate this term as “slander” when it refers to blaspheming people.

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* To “blaspheme” can be translated as to “say evil things against” or to “dishonor God” or to “slander.”
* Ways to translate “blasphemy” could include “speaking wrongly about others” or “slander” or “spreading false rumors.”

(See also: dishonor, slander)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Timothy 1:12–14](https://ref.ly/1Tim1:12-1Tim1:14)
* [Acts 6:11](https://ref.ly/Acts6:11)
* [Acts 26:9–11](https://ref.ly/Acts26:9-Acts26:11)
* [James 2:5–7](https://ref.ly/Jas2:5-Jas2:7)
* [John 10:32–33](https://ref.ly/John10:32-John10:33)
* [Luke 12:10](https://ref.ly/Luke12:10)
* [Mark 14:64](https://ref.ly/Mark14:64)
* [Matthew 12:31](https://ref.ly/Matt12:31)
* [Matthew 26:65](https://ref.ly/Matt26:65)
* [Psalms 74:10](https://ref.ly/Ps74:10)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1288, H1442, H2778, H5006, H5007, H5344, G09870, G09880, G09890

* **Associated Passages:** Psalms 74:10; Matthew 9:3; Matthew 12:31; Matthew 15:19; Matthew 26:65; Matthew 27:39; Mark 2:7; Mark 3:28; Mark 3:29; Mark 14:64; Mark 15:29; Luke 5:21; Luke 12:10; Luke 22:65; Luke 23:39; John 10:33; John 10:36; Acts 6:11; Acts 13:45; Acts 19:37; Acts 26:11; Romans 2:24; Ephesians 4:31; 1 Timothy 1:13; 1 Timothy 1:20; 1 Timothy 6:1; 2 Timothy 3:2; James 2:7; 2 Peter 2:10; 2 Peter 2:11; 2 Peter 2:12; Jude 1:8; Revelation 13:1; Revelation 13:5; Revelation 13:6; Revelation 16:9; Revelation 16:11; Revelation 16:21; Revelation 17:3; Acts 26:9-11; 1 Timothy 1:12-14; James 2:5-7; John 10:32-33
* **Associated Articles:** Dishonor (ID: `26530@UWTranslationWords`); Slander (ID: `27102@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Blaspheme (ID: `keyterm:Blaspheme`)

## Blemish (id: 26402)

blemish, unblemished, defect
============================

Facts:
------

The term “blemish” refers to a physical defect or imperfection on an animal or person. It can also refer to spiritual imperfections and faults in people.

* For certain sacrifices, God instructed the Israelites to offer an animal with no blemishes or defects.
* This is a picture of how Jesus Christ was the perfect sacrifice, without any sin.
* Believers in Christ have been cleansed from their sin by his blood and are considered to be without blemish.
* Ways to translate this term could include “defect” or “imperfection” or “sin,” depending on the context.

(See also: believe, clean, sacrifice, sin)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Peter 1:19](https://ref.ly/1Pet1:19)
* [2 Peter 2:13](https://ref.ly/2Pet2:13)
* [Deuteronomy 15:19–21](https://ref.ly/Deut15:19-Deut15:21)
* [Numbers 6:13–15](https://ref.ly/Num6:13-Num6:15)
* [Song of Songs 4:7](https://ref.ly/Song4:7)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H3971, H8400, H8549, G34700

* **Associated Passages:** Exodus 29:1; Song of Songs 4:7; 1 Peter 1:19; 2 Peter 2:13; Numbers 6:13-15; Deuteronomy 15:19-21
* **Associated Articles:** Believe (ID: `26381@UWTranslationWords`); Clean (ID: `26454@UWTranslationWords`); Sacrifice (ID: `27046@UWTranslationWords`); Sin (ID: `27098@UWTranslationWords`)


## Bless (id: 26403)

bless, blessed, blessing
========================

Definition:
-----------

To “bless” someone or something means to cause good and beneficial things to happen to the person or thing that is being blessed.

* Blessing someone also means expressing a desire for positive and beneficial things to happen to that person.
* In Bible times, a father would often pronounce a formal blessing on his children.
* When people “bless” God or express a desire that God be blessed, this means they are praising him.
* The term “bless” is sometimes used for consecrating food before it is eaten, or for thanking and praising God for the food.

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* To “bless” could also be translated as to “provide abundantly for” or to “be very kind and favorable toward.”
* “God has brought great blessing to” could be translated as “God has given many good things to” or “God has provided abundantly for” or “God has caused many good things to happen to”.
* “He is blessed” could be translated as “he will greatly benefit” or “he will experience good things” or “God will cause him to flourish.”
* “Blessed is the person who” could be translated as “How good it is for the person who.”
* Expressions like “blessed be the Lord” could be translated as “May the Lord be praised” or “Praise the Lord” or “I praise the Lord.”
* In the context of blessing food, this could be translated as “thanked God for the food” or “praised God for giving them food” or “consecrated the food by praising God for it.”

(See also: praise)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Corinthians 10:16](https://ref.ly/1Cor10:16)
* [Acts 13:34](https://ref.ly/Acts13:34)
* [Ephesians 1:3](https://ref.ly/Eph1:3)
* [Genesis 14:20](https://ref.ly/Gen14:20)
* [Isaiah 44:3](https://ref.ly/Isa44:3)
* [James 1:25](https://ref.ly/Jas1:25)
* [Luke 6:20](https://ref.ly/Luke6:20)
* [Matthew 26:26](https://ref.ly/Matt26:26)
* [Nehemiah 9:5](https://ref.ly/Neh9:5)
* [Romans 4:9](https://ref.ly/Rom4:9)

Examples from the Bible stories:
--------------------------------

* **1:7** God saw that it was good and he **blessed** them.
* **1:15** God made Adam and Eve in his own image. He **blessed** them and told them, “Have many children and grandchildren and fill the earth.”
* **1:16** So God rested from all he had been doing. He **blessed** the seventh day and made it holy, because on this day he rested from his work.
* **4:4** “I will make your name great. I will **bless** those who **bless** you and curse those who curse you. All families on earth will be **blessed** because of you.”
* **4:7** Melchizedek **blessed** Abram and said, “May God Most High who owns heaven and earth **bless** Abram.”
* **7:3** Isaac wanted to give his **blessing** to Esau.
* **8:5** Even in prison, Joseph remained faithful to God, and God **blessed** him.

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0833, H0835, H1288, H1289, H1293, G17570, G21270, G21280, G21290, G31060, G31070, G31080, G60500

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 1:22; Genesis 1:28; Genesis 2:3; Genesis 5:2; Genesis 9:1; Genesis 9:26; Genesis 12:2; Genesis 12:3; Genesis 14:19; Genesis 14:20; Genesis 17:16; Genesis 17:20; Genesis 18:18; Genesis 22:17; Genesis 22:18; Genesis 24:1; Genesis 24:27; Genesis 24:31; Genesis 24:35; Genesis 24:48; Genesis 24:60; Genesis 25:11; Genesis 26:3; Genesis 26:4; Genesis 26:12; Genesis 26:24; Genesis 26:29; Genesis 27:4; Genesis 27:7; Genesis 27:10; Genesis 27:12; Genesis 27:19; Genesis 27:23; Genesis 27:25; Genesis 27:27; Genesis 27:29; Genesis 27:30; Genesis 27:31; Genesis 27:33; Genesis 27:34; Genesis 27:35; Genesis 27:36; Genesis 27:38; Genesis 27:41; Genesis 28:1; Genesis 28:3; Genesis 28:4; Genesis 28:6; Genesis 28:14; Genesis 30:27; Genesis 30:30; Genesis 31:55; Genesis 32:26; Genesis 32:29; Genesis 33:11; Genesis 35:9; Genesis 39:5; Genesis 47:7; Genesis 47:10; Genesis 48:3; Genesis 48:9; Genesis 48:15; Genesis 48:16; Genesis 48:20; Genesis 49:25; Genesis 49:26; Genesis 49:28; Exodus 12:32; Exodus 18:10; Exodus 20:11; Exodus 20:24; Exodus 23:25; Exodus 32:29; Exodus 39:43; Ruth 2:4; Ruth 2:19; Ruth 2:20; Ruth 3:10; Ruth 4:14; Ezra 7:27; Nehemiah 8:6; Nehemiah 9:5; Nehemiah 11:2; Nehemiah 13:2; Job 1:5; Job 1:10; Job 1:11; Job 1:21; Job 2:5; Job 2:9; Job 29:13; Job 31:20; Job 42:12; Proverbs 3:13; Proverbs 3:18; Proverbs 3:33; Proverbs 5:18; Proverbs 8:32; Proverbs 8:34; Proverbs 10:6; Proverbs 10:7; Proverbs 10:22; Proverbs 11:11; Proverbs 11:25; Proverbs 11:26; Proverbs 14:21; Proverbs 16:20; Proverbs 20:7; Proverbs 20:21; Proverbs 22:9; Proverbs 24:25; Proverbs 27:14; Proverbs 28:14; Proverbs 28:20; Proverbs 29:18; Proverbs 30:11; Proverbs 31:28; Isaiah 44:3; Haggai 2:19; Matthew 5:3; Matthew 5:4; Matthew 5:5; Matthew 5:6; Matthew 5:7; Matthew 5:8; Matthew 5:9; Matthew 5:10; Matthew 5:11; Matthew 11:6; Matthew 13:16; Matthew 14:19; Matthew 16:17; Matthew 21:9; Matthew 23:39; Matthew 24:46; Matthew 25:34; Matthew 26:26; Mark 6:41; Mark 8:7; Mark 10:16; Mark 11:9; Mark 11:10; Mark 14:22; Mark 14:61; Luke 1:42; Luke 1:45; Luke 1:48; Luke 1:64; Luke 1:68; Luke 2:28; Luke 2:34; Luke 6:20; Luke 6:21; Luke 6:22; Luke 6:28; Luke 7:23; Luke 9:16; Luke 10:23; Luke 11:27; Luke 11:28; Luke 12:37; Luke 12:38; Luke 12:43; Luke 13:35; Luke 14:14; Luke 14:15; Luke 19:38; Luke 23:29; Luke 24:30; Luke 24:50; Luke 24:51; Luke 24:53; John 12:13; John 13:17; John 20:29; Acts 3:25; Acts 3:26; Acts 13:34; Acts 20:35; Acts 26:2; Romans 1:25; Romans 4:6; Romans 4:7; Romans 4:8; Romans 4:9; Romans 9:5; Romans 12:14; Romans 14:22; Romans 15:29; 1 Corinthians 4:12; 1 Corinthians 7:40; 1 Corinthians 10:16; 1 Corinthians 14:16; 2 Corinthians 1:3; 2 Corinthians 9:5; 2 Corinthians 9:6; 2 Corinthians 11:31; Ephesians 1:3; 1 Timothy 1:11; 1 Timothy 6:15; Titus 2:13; Hebrews 6:7; Hebrews 6:14; Hebrews 7:1; Hebrews 7:6; Hebrews 7:7; Hebrews 11:20; Hebrews 11:21; Hebrews 12:17; James 1:12; James 1:25; James 3:9; James 3:10; James 5:11; 1 Peter 1:3; 1 Peter 3:9; 1 Peter 3:14; 1 Peter 4:14; Revelation 1:3; Revelation 14:13; Revelation 16:15; Revelation 19:9; Revelation 20:6; Revelation 22:7; Revelation 22:14
* **Associated Articles:** Praise (ID: `26974@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Bless (ID: `keyterm:Bless`)

## Bloodshed (id: 26404)

bloodshed
=========

Definition:
-----------

The term “bloodshed” refers to the death of human beings due to murder, war, or some other violent act.

* This term literally means “shedding of blood,” which refers to when blood comes out of a person’s body from an open wound.
* The term “bloodshed” is often used to refer to widespread killing of people.
* It is also used as a general reference to the sin of murder.

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* “The bloodshed” could be translated as “the killing of people” or “the many people who were killed.”
* “Through bloodshed” could also be translated as “by killing people.”
* “Innocent bloodshed” could be translated as “killing innocent people.”
* “Bloodshed follows bloodshed” could be translated as “they keep killing people” or “the killing of people goes on and on” or “they have killed many people and continue to do that” or “people keep killing other people.”
* Another figurative use, “bloodshed will pursue you,” could be translated as “your people will continue to experience bloodshed” or “your people will keep being killed” or “your people will continue to be at war with other nations and people will keep dying.”

(See also: blood; slaughter)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Chronicles 22:6–8](https://ref.ly/1Chr22:6-1Chr22:8)
* [Genesis 9:5–7](https://ref.ly/Gen9:5-Gen9:7)
* [Hebrews 9:21–22](https://ref.ly/Heb9:21-Heb9:22)
* [Isaiah 26:21](https://ref.ly/Isa26:21)
* [Matthew 23:29–31](https://ref.ly/Matt23:29-Matt23:31)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1818

* **Associated Passages:** Exodus 22:2; Exodus 22:3; Proverbs 29:10; Isaiah 26:21; Genesis 9:5-7; Matthew 23:29-31; 1 Chronicles 22:6-8; Hebrews 9:21-22
* **Associated Articles:** Slaughter (ID: `27103@UWTranslationWords`)


## Blotout (id: 26405)

blot out, wipe out
==================

Definition:
-----------

The terms “blot out” and “wipe out” are expressions that mean to completely remove or destroy something or someone.

* These expressions can be used in a positive sense, as when God “blots out” sins by forgiving them and choosing not to remember them.
* It is also often used in a negative sense, as when God “blots out” or “wipes out” a people group, destroying them because of their sin.
* The Bible talks about a person’s name being “blotted out” or “wiped out” of God’s Book of Life, which means that the person will not receive eternal life.

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* Depending on the context, these expressions could be translated as “get rid of” or “remove” or “completely destroy” or “completely remove.”
* When referring to blotting someone’s name out of the Book of Life, this could be translated as “removed from” or “erased.”

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Deuteronomy 29:20](https://ref.ly/Deut29:20)
* [Exodus 32:30–32](https://ref.ly/Exod32:30-Exod32:32)
* [Genesis 7:23](https://ref.ly/Gen7:23)
* [Psalm 51:1](https://ref.ly/Ps51:1)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H4229, H8045, G18130

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 6:7; Genesis 7:4; Genesis 7:23; Exodus 17:14; Exodus 32:32; Exodus 32:33; Deuteronomy 29:20; Nehemiah 4:5; Nehemiah 13:14; Psalms 51:1; Proverbs 6:33; Proverbs 31:3; Exodus 32:30-32


## Boaz (id: 26406)

Boaz
====

Facts:
------

Boaz was an Israelite man who lived during the time when there were judges ruled Israel. He married a Moabite woman named Ruth and became both the great grandfather of King David and an ancestor of Jesus Christ.

* He was a relative of an Israelite woman named Naomi who had returned to Israel after her husband and sons died in Moab.
* Boaz “redeemed” Naomi’s widowed daughter\-in\-law Ruth by marrying her and giving her a future with a husband and children.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Moab, redeem, Ruth)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Chronicles 2:12](https://ref.ly/1Chr2:12)
* [2 Chronicles 3:17](https://ref.ly/2Chr3:17)
* [Luke 3:30–32](https://ref.ly/Luke3:30-Luke3:32)
* [Matthew 1:5](https://ref.ly/Matt1:5)
* [Ruth 2:4](https://ref.ly/Ruth2:4)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1162

* **Associated Passages:** Ruth 2:1; Ruth 2:3; Ruth 2:4; Ruth 2:5; Ruth 2:8; Ruth 2:11; Ruth 2:14; Ruth 2:15; Ruth 2:19; Ruth 2:23; Ruth 3:2; Ruth 3:7; Ruth 4:1; Ruth 4:5; Ruth 4:8; Ruth 4:9; Ruth 4:13; Ruth 4:21; 1 Chronicles 2:12; 2 Chronicles 3:17; Matthew 1:5; Luke 3:32; Luke 3:30-32
* **Associated Articles:** Moab (ID: `26884@UWTranslationWords`); Redeem (ID: `27019@UWTranslationWords`); Ruth (ID: `27043@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Boaz (ID: `person:Boaz`)

## Bond (id: 26407)

bind, bond, bound
=================

Definition:
-----------

The term “bind” means to tie something or fasten it securely. Something that is tied or joined together is called a “bond.” The term “bound” is the past tense of this term.

* To be “bound” means to have something tied or wrapped around something else.
* In a figurative sense, a person can be “bound” to a vow, which means he is “required to fulfill” what he promised to do.
* The term “bonds” refers to anything that binds, confines, or imprisons someone. It usually refers to physical chains, fetters or ropes that keep a person from being free to move.
* In Bible times, bonds such as ropes or chains were used to attach prisoners to the wall or floor of a stone prison.
* The term “bind” can also be used to talk about wrapping cloth around a wound to help it heal.
* A dead person would be “bound” with cloth in preparation for burial.
* The term “bond” is used figuratively to refer to something, such as sin, that controls or enslaves someone.
* A bond can also be a close relationship between people in which they support each other emotionally, spiritually and physically. This applies to the bond of marriage.
* For example, a husband and wife are “bound” or tied to each other. It is a bond that God does not want broken.

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* The term “bind” could also be translated as “tie” or “tie up” or “wrap (around).”
* Figuratively, it could be translated as to “restrain” or to “prevent” or to “keep from (something).”
* A special use of “bind” in Matthew 16 and 18 means “forbid” or “not permit.”
* The term “bonds” could be translated as “chains” or “ropes” or “shackles.”
* Figuratively the term “bond” could be translated as “knot” or “connection” or “close relationship.”
* The phrase “bond of peace” means “being in harmony, which brings people in closer relationship to each other” or “the tying together that peace brings.”
* To “bind up” could be translated as “wrap around” or “put a bandage on.”
* To “bind” oneself with a vow could be translated as “promise to fulfill a vow” or “commit to fulfill a vow.”
* Depending on the context, the term “bound” could also be translated as “tied” or “tied up” or “chained” or “obligated (to fulfill)” or “required to do.”

(See also: fulfill, peace, prison, servant, vow)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Leviticus 8:7](https://ref.ly/Lev8:7)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0247, H0481, H0519, H0615, H0631, H0632, H0640, H1366, H1367, H1379, H2280, H2706, H3256, H3533, H3729, H4147, H4148, H4205, H4562, H5650, H5656, H5659, H6029, H6123, H6616, H6696, H6872, H6887, H7194, H7405, H7573, H7576, H8198, H8244, H8379, G02540, G03310, G03320, G11950, G11960, G11980, G11990, G12100, G13970, G13980, G14010, G14020, G26110, G26150, G37340, G37840, G38140, G40190, G40290, G43850, G48860, G48870, G52650

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 22:9; Genesis 37:7; Genesis 38:28; Genesis 42:24; Genesis 44:30; Genesis 49:11; Exodus 22:11; Leviticus 8:7; Job 31:39; Proverbs 3:3; Proverbs 6:21; Proverbs 7:3; Proverbs 22:15; Proverbs 26:8; Matthew 12:29; Matthew 13:30; Matthew 14:3; Matthew 16:19; Matthew 18:18; Matthew 22:13; Matthew 23:4; Matthew 27:2; Mark 3:27; Mark 5:3; Mark 5:4; Mark 6:17; Mark 7:35; Mark 15:1; Mark 15:7; Luke 8:29; Luke 10:34; Luke 13:16; John 11:44; John 18:12; John 19:40; Acts 8:23; Acts 9:2; Acts 9:14; Acts 9:21; Acts 12:6; Acts 20:22; Acts 20:23; Acts 21:11; Acts 21:13; Acts 21:33; Acts 22:4; Acts 22:5; Acts 22:29; Acts 23:29; Acts 26:29; Acts 26:31; Acts 28:20; Romans 7:2; Romans 7:6; Romans 11:32; 1 Corinthians 7:15; 1 Corinthians 7:27; 1 Corinthians 7:39; Ephesians 4:3; Philippians 1:7; Philippians 1:13; Philippians 1:14; Philippians 1:17; Colossians 3:14; Colossians 4:3; Colossians 4:18; 2 Timothy 2:9; Philemon 1:10; Philemon 1:13; Hebrews 11:36; Hebrews 13:3; 2 Peter 2:4; Jude 1:6; Revelation 9:14; Revelation 20:2
* **Associated Articles:** Fulfill (ID: `26619@UWTranslationWords`); Peace (ID: `26938@UWTranslationWords`); Servant (ID: `27075@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Chain (ID: `realia:Chain`)

## Book of Life (id: 26408)

Book of Life
============

Definition:
-----------

The term “Book of Life” is used to refer to where God has written the names of all the people whom he has redeemed and given eternal life to.

* Revelation refers to this book as “the Lamb’s Book of Life.” This could be translated as “the book of life belonging to Jesus, the Lamb of God.” The sacrifice of Jesus on the cross paid the penalty for people’s sins so that they can have eternal life through faith in him.
* The word for “book” can also mean “scroll” or “letter” or “writing” or “legal document.” It may be literal or figurative.

(See also: everlasting, lamb, life, sacrifice, scroll)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Philippians 4:3](https://ref.ly/Phil4:3)
* [Psalms 69:28–29](https://ref.ly/Ps69:28-Ps69:29)
* [Revelation 3:5–6](https://ref.ly/Rev3:5-Rev3:6)
* [Revelation 20:11–12](https://ref.ly/Rev20:11-Rev20:12)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H2416, H5612, G09760, G22220

* **Associated Passages:** Exodus 32:32; Exodus 32:33; Philippians 4:3; Revelation 3:5; Revelation 13:8; Revelation 17:8; Revelation 20:15; Revelation 21:27; Revelation 20:11-12; Psalms 69:28-29; Revelation 3:5-6
* **Associated Articles:** Eternity (ID: `26570@Unknown`); Lamb (ID: `26809@UWTranslationWords`); Sacrifice (ID: `27046@UWTranslationWords`); Scroll (ID: `27063@UWTranslationWords`)


## Born Again (id: 26409)

born again, born of God, new birth
==================================

Definition:
-----------

The term “born again” was first used by Jesus to describe what it means for God to change a person from being dead spiritually to being alive spiritually. The terms “born of God” and “born of the Spirit” also refer to a person being given new spiritual life.

* All humans are born spiritually dead and are given a “new birth” when they accept Jesus Christ as their Savior.
* At the moment of the spiritual new birth, God’s Holy Spirit begins to live in the new believer and empowers him to produce good spiritual fruit in his life.
* It is God’s work to cause a person to be born again and become his child.

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* Other ways to translate “born again” could include “born anew” or “born spiritually.”
* It is best to translate this term literally and use the normal word in the language that would be used for being born.
* The term “new birth” might be translated as “spiritual birth.”
* The phrase “born of God” could be translated as “caused by God to have new life like a newborn baby” or “given new life by God.”
* In the same way, “born of the Spirit” could be translated as “given new life by the Holy Spirit” or “empowered by the Holy Spirit to become God’s child” or “caused by the Spirit to have new life like a newborn baby.”

(See also: Holy Spirit, save)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 John 3:9](https://ref.ly/1John3:9)
* [1 Peter 1:3](https://ref.ly/1Pet1:3)
* [1 Peter 1:23](https://ref.ly/1Pet1:23)
* [John 3:4](https://ref.ly/John3:4)
* [John 3:7](https://ref.ly/John3:7)
* [Titus 3:5](https://ref.ly/Titus3:5)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: G03130, G05090, G10800, G38240

* **Associated Passages:** Matthew 19:28; John 1:13; John 3:3; John 3:4; John 3:5; John 3:6; John 3:7; John 3:8; Titus 3:5; 1 Peter 1:3; 1 Peter 1:23; 1 John 2:29; 1 John 3:9; 1 John 4:7; 1 John 5:1; 1 John 5:4; 1 John 5:18
* **Associated Articles:** Holy Spirit (ID: `26702@UWTranslationWords`); Save (ID: `27059@UWTranslationWords`); John 1:13 (#2) (ID: `210708@Unknown`); John 3:6 (#4) (ID: `210948@Unknown`)


## Bow (id: 26410)

bow, bow down, kneel, bend, bend the knee
=========================================

Definition:
-----------

To bow means to bend over to humbly express respect and honor toward someone. To “bow down” means to bend over or kneel down very low, often with face and hands toward the ground.

* Other expressions include “bow the knee” (meaning to kneel) and “bow the head” (meaning to bend the head forward in humble respect or in sorrow).
* Bowing down can also be a sign of distress or mourning. Someone who is “bowed down” has been brought to a low position of humility.
* Often a person will bow in the presence of someone who is of higher status or greater importance, such as kings and other rulers.
* Bowing down before God is an expression of worship to him.
* In the Bible, people bowed down to Jesus when they realized from his miracles and teaching that he had come from God.
* The Bible says that when Jesus comes back someday, everyone will bow the knee to worship him.

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* Depending on the context, this term could be translated with a word or phrase that means “bend forward” or “bend the head” or “kneel.”
* The term “bow down” could be translated as “kneel down” or “prostrate oneself.”
* Some languages will have more than one way of translating this term, depending on the context.

(See also: humble, worship)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [2 Kings 5:18](https://ref.ly/2Kgs5:18)
* [Exodus 20:5](https://ref.ly/Exod20:5)
* [Genesis 24:26](https://ref.ly/Gen24:26)
* [Genesis 44:14](https://ref.ly/Gen44:14)
* [Isaiah 44:19](https://ref.ly/Isa44:19)
* [Luke 24:5](https://ref.ly/Luke24:5)
* [Matthew 2:11](https://ref.ly/Matt2:11)
* [Revelation 3:9](https://ref.ly/Rev3:9)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0086, H3721, H3766, H5753, H5791, H6915, H7743, H7812, H7817, G11200, G25780, G28270, G40980

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 18:2; Genesis 19:1; Genesis 23:7; Genesis 23:12; Genesis 24:26; Genesis 24:48; Genesis 24:52; Genesis 27:29; Genesis 33:3; Genesis 33:6; Genesis 33:7; Genesis 37:7; Genesis 37:9; Genesis 37:10; Genesis 41:43; Genesis 42:6; Genesis 43:26; Genesis 43:28; Genesis 44:14; Genesis 47:31; Genesis 48:12; Genesis 49:8; Genesis 50:18; Exodus 4:31; Exodus 11:8; Exodus 12:27; Exodus 18:7; Exodus 20:5; Exodus 23:24; Exodus 32:8; Exodus 33:10; Exodus 34:8; Exodus 34:14; Ruth 2:10; 2 Kings 5:18; Nehemiah 8:6; Job 1:15; Job 1:19; Job 1:20; Job 4:4; Job 31:10; Job 39:3; Proverbs 14:19; Isaiah 44:19; Matthew 2:11; Matthew 4:9; Matthew 9:18; Matthew 17:6; Matthew 18:26; Matthew 18:29; Matthew 20:20; Matthew 26:39; Matthew 27:29; Mark 3:11; Mark 5:6; Mark 5:22; Mark 5:33; Mark 7:25; Mark 14:35; Mark 15:19; Luke 5:8; Luke 5:12; Luke 8:28; Luke 8:41; Luke 8:47; Luke 17:16; Luke 24:5; John 11:32; John 19:30; Acts 7:60; Acts 9:40; Acts 10:25; Acts 16:29; Acts 20:36; Acts 21:5; Romans 11:4; Romans 11:10; Romans 14:11; Ephesians 3:14; Philippians 2:10; Revelation 3:9; Revelation 4:10; Revelation 5:8; Revelation 5:14; Revelation 7:11; Revelation 11:16; Revelation 19:4; Revelation 19:10; Revelation 22:8
* **Associated Articles:** Humble (ID: `26718@UWTranslationWords`); Worship (ID: `27215@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Bow (ID: `realia:Bow`)

## Bow Weapon (id: 26411)

bow and arrow, a bow
====================

Definition:
-----------

This is a type of weapon that consists of shooting arrows from a stringed bow. In Bible times it was used for fighting against enemies and for killing animals for food.

* The bow is made out of wood, bone, metal, or other hard material, such as a deer’s antler. It has a curved shape and is strung tightly with a string, cord, or vine. When not in use the bow string would not be attached to both ends of the bow so that the bow was not under the pressure of being bent all the time. When preparing to fight a warrior would bend the bow and attach the string to both ends.
* An arrow is a thin shaft with a sharp, pointed head on one end. In ancient times, the arrows could be made of a variety of materials such as wood, bone, stone, or metal.
* Bows and arrows are commonly used by hunters and warriors.
* The term “arrow” is also sometimes used figuratively in the Bible to refer to enemy attacks or divine judgment.

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Genesis 21:16](https://ref.ly/Gen21:16)
* [Habakkuk 3:9–10](https://ref.ly/Hab3:9-Hab3:10)
* [Job 29:20–22](https://ref.ly/Job29:20-Job29:22)
* [Lamentations 2:4](https://ref.ly/Lam2:4)
* [Psalms 58:6–8](https://ref.ly/Ps58:6-Ps58:8)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H2671, H7198, G51150

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 9:13; Genesis 9:14; Genesis 9:16; Genesis 21:16; Genesis 27:3; Genesis 48:22; Genesis 49:23; Genesis 49:24; Nehemiah 4:13; Nehemiah 4:16; Job 29:20; Proverbs 7:23; Proverbs 25:18; Proverbs 26:18; Lamentations 2:4; Revelation 6:2; Habakkuk 3:9-10; Job 29:20-22; Psalms 58:6-8

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Bow (ID: `realia:Bow`)

## Bread (id: 26412)

bread
=====

Definition:
-----------

Bread is a food made from flour mixed with water and oil to form a dough. The dough is then shaped into a loaf and baked.

* When the term “loaf” occurs by itself, it means “loaf of bread.”
* Bread dough is usually made with something that makes it rise, such as yeast. However, bread can also be made without yeast so that it does not rise. This is called “unleavened bread” in the Bible. The ancient Israelites ate “unleavened bread” during the passover meal.
* Since bread was the main food for many people in biblical times, this term is also used in the Bible to refer to food in general. (See: Synecdoche) Many times the term “bread” can be translated more generally as “food.”
* The phrase “bread of the presence” refers to twelve loaves of bread that were placed on a golden table in the tabernacle or temple building as a sacrifice to God. These loaves represented the twelve tribes of Israel and were only for the priests to eat. This could be translated as “bread showing that God lived among them.”
* The term “bread from heaven” refers to the special white food called “manna” that God provided for the Israelites when they were wandering through the desert. Jesus also called himself the “bread that came down from heaven” and the “bread of life.”

(See also: Passover, tabernacle, temple, unleavened bread, yeast)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Acts 2:46](https://ref.ly/Acts2:46)
* [Acts 27:35](https://ref.ly/Acts27:35)
* [Exodus 16:15](https://ref.ly/Exod16:15)
* [Luke 9:13](https://ref.ly/Luke9:13)
* [Mark 6:38](https://ref.ly/Mark6:38)
* [Matthew 4:4](https://ref.ly/Matt4:4)
* [Matthew 11:18](https://ref.ly/Matt11:18)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H2557, H3899, H4635, H4682, G01060, G07400, G42860

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 3:19; Genesis 14:18; Genesis 18:5; Genesis 21:14; Genesis 25:34; Genesis 27:17; Genesis 28:20; Genesis 31:54; Genesis 37:25; Genesis 39:6; Genesis 40:16; Genesis 41:54; Genesis 41:55; Genesis 43:25; Genesis 43:31; Genesis 43:32; Genesis 45:23; Genesis 47:12; Genesis 47:13; Genesis 47:15; Genesis 47:17; Genesis 47:19; Genesis 49:20; Exodus 2:20; Exodus 8:3; Exodus 16:3; Exodus 16:4; Exodus 16:8; Exodus 16:12; Exodus 16:15; Exodus 16:22; Exodus 16:29; Exodus 16:32; Exodus 18:12; Exodus 23:25; Exodus 25:30; Exodus 29:2; Exodus 29:23; Exodus 29:32; Exodus 29:34; Exodus 34:28; Exodus 35:13; Exodus 39:36; Exodus 40:23; Ruth 1:6; Ruth 2:14; Ezra 10:6; Nehemiah 5:14; Nehemiah 5:18; Nehemiah 9:15; Job 3:24; Job 6:7; Job 20:14; Job 22:7; Job 24:5; Job 27:14; Job 28:5; Job 33:20; Job 42:11; Proverbs 4:17; Proverbs 6:8; Proverbs 6:26; Proverbs 9:5; Proverbs 9:17; Proverbs 12:9; Proverbs 12:11; Proverbs 20:13; Proverbs 20:17; Proverbs 22:9; Proverbs 23:3; Proverbs 23:6; Proverbs 25:21; Proverbs 28:3; Proverbs 28:19; Proverbs 28:21; Proverbs 30:8; Proverbs 30:22; Proverbs 31:27; Obadiah 1:7; Haggai 2:12; Matthew 4:3; Matthew 4:4; Matthew 6:11; Matthew 7:9; Matthew 11:18; Matthew 12:4; Matthew 14:17; Matthew 14:19; Matthew 15:2; Matthew 15:26; Matthew 15:33; Matthew 15:34; Matthew 15:36; Matthew 16:5; Matthew 16:7; Matthew 16:8; Matthew 16:9; Matthew 16:10; Matthew 16:11; Matthew 16:12; Matthew 26:26; Mark 2:26; Mark 3:20; Mark 6:8; Mark 6:37; Mark 6:38; Mark 6:41; Mark 6:44; Mark 6:52; Mark 7:2; Mark 7:5; Mark 7:27; Mark 8:4; Mark 8:5; Mark 8:6; Mark 8:14; Mark 8:16; Mark 8:17; Mark 8:19; Mark 14:22; Luke 4:3; Luke 4:4; Luke 6:4; Luke 7:33; Luke 9:3; Luke 9:13; Luke 9:16; Luke 11:3; Luke 11:5; Luke 14:1; Luke 14:15; Luke 15:17; Luke 22:19; Luke 24:30; Luke 24:35; John 6:5; John 6:7; John 6:9; John 6:11; John 6:13; John 6:23; John 6:26; John 6:31; John 6:32; John 6:33; John 6:34; John 6:35; John 6:41; John 6:48; John 6:50; John 6:51; John 6:58; John 13:18; John 21:9; John 21:13; Acts 2:42; Acts 2:46; Acts 20:7; Acts 20:11; Acts 27:35; 1 Corinthians 10:16; 1 Corinthians 10:17; 1 Corinthians 11:23; 1 Corinthians 11:26; 1 Corinthians 11:27; 1 Corinthians 11:28; 2 Corinthians 9:10; 2 Thessalonians 3:8; 2 Thessalonians 3:12; Hebrews 9:2
* **Associated Articles:** Passover (ID: `26934@UWTranslationWords`); Tabernacle (ID: `27136@UWTranslationWords`); Unleavened Bread (ID: `27186@UWTranslationWords`); Yeast (ID: `27220@UWTranslationWords`); Temple (ID: `27142@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Bread of Display (ID: `realia:BreadOfDisplay`); Unleavened Bread (ID: `realia:UnleavenedBread`)

## Breast Plate (id: 26413)

breastplate, breastpiece
========================

Definition:
-----------

The term “breastplate” refers to a piece of armor covering the front of the chest to protect a soldier during battle. The term “breastpiece” refers to a special piece of clothing that the Israelite high priest wore over the front part of his chest.

* A “breastplate” used by a soldier could be made of wood, metal, or animal skin. It was made to prevent arrows, spears, or swords from piercing the chest of the soldier.
* The “breastpiece” worn by the Israelite high priest was made of cloth and had valuable gems attached to it. The priest wore this when he was performing his duties of service to God in the temple.
* Other ways to translate the term “breastplate” could include “metal protective chest covering” or “armor piece protecting the chest.”
* The term “breastpiece” could be translated with a word that means “priestly clothing covering the chest” or “priestly garment piece” or “front piece of priest’s clothing.”

(See also: armor, high priest, pierce, priest, temple, warrior)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Thessalonians 5:8](https://ref.ly/1Thess5:8)
* [Exodus 39:14–16](https://ref.ly/Exod39:14-Exod39:16)
* [Isaiah 59:17](https://ref.ly/Isa59:17)
* [Revelation 9:7–9](https://ref.ly/Rev9:7-Rev9:9)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H2833, H8302, G23820

* **Associated Passages:** Exodus 25:7; Exodus 28:4; Exodus 28:15; Exodus 28:22; Exodus 28:23; Exodus 28:24; Exodus 28:26; Exodus 28:28; Exodus 28:29; Exodus 28:30; Exodus 29:5; Exodus 35:9; Exodus 35:27; Exodus 39:8; Exodus 39:9; Exodus 39:15; Exodus 39:16; Exodus 39:17; Exodus 39:19; Exodus 39:21; Nehemiah 4:16; Isaiah 59:17; Ephesians 6:14; 1 Thessalonians 5:8; Revelation 9:9; Revelation 9:17; Exodus 39:14-16; Revelation 9:7-9
* **Associated Articles:** Armor (ID: `26334@UWTranslationWords`); High Priest (ID: `26694@UWTranslationWords`); Priest (ID: `26979@UWTranslationWords`); Warrior (ID: `27198@UWTranslationWords`); Temple (ID: `27142@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Breastplate (ID: `realia:Breastplate`); Breast-Piece (ID: `realia:Breast-piece`)

## Bribe (id: 26414)

bribe, bribery, payoffs
=======================

Definition:
-----------

To “bribe” means to give someone something of value, such as money, to influence that person to do something dishonest.

* The soldiers who guarded Jesus’ empty tomb were bribed with money to lie about what happened.
* Sometimes a government official will be bribed to overlook a crime or to vote a certain way.
* The Bible forbids giving or taking bribes.
* The term, “bribe” could be translated as “dishonest payment” or “payment for lying” or “price for breaking the rules.”
* To “bribe” could be translated with a word or phrase that means, to “pay to influence (someone)” or to “pay to have a dishonest favor done” or to “pay for a favor.”

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Samuel 8:1–3](https://ref.ly/1Sam8:1-1Sam8:3)
* [Ecclesiastes 7:7](https://ref.ly/Eccl7:7)
* [Isaiah 1:23](https://ref.ly/Isa1:23)
* [Micah 3:9–11](https://ref.ly/Mic3:9-Mic3:11)
* [Proverbs 15:27–28](https://ref.ly/Prov15:27-Prov15:28)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H3724, H4979, H7809, H7810, H7936, H7966, H8021, H8641, G52600

* **Associated Passages:** Exodus 23:8; Proverbs 6:35; Proverbs 15:27; Proverbs 17:8; Proverbs 17:23; Proverbs 21:14; Ecclesiastes 7:7; Isaiah 1:23; 1 Samuel 8:1-3; Micah 3:9-11; Proverbs 15:27-28


## Bride (id: 26415)

bride, bridal
=============

Definition:
-----------

A bride is the woman in a marriage ceremony who will marry the bridegroom (the **man**).

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

You could use the term that your language uses to refer to the woman who is getting married in a marriage ceremony or if you do not have a term for this in your language you could use a descriptive phrase to describe what a bride is. Depending on the context you could translate the term “bride” with descriptive phrases such as “a woman getting married” or “a woman who is being married” or “the woman getting married.”

(See also: bridegroom, marriage)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Exodus 22:16](https://ref.ly/Exod22:16)
* [Isaiah 62:5](https://ref.ly/Isa62:5)
* [Joel 2:16](https://ref.ly/Joel2:16)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H3618, G35650

* **Associated Passages:** Exodus 22:16; Isaiah 62:5; Joel 2:16; John 3:29; Revelation 18:23; Revelation 19:7; Revelation 21:2; Revelation 21:9; Revelation 22:17
* **Associated Articles:** Bridegroom (ID: `26416@UWTranslationWords`); Marriage (ID: `26854@UWTranslationWords`)


## Bridegroom (id: 26416)

bridegroom, groom
=================

Definition:
-----------

In a marriage ceremony, the bridegroom, also called the groom, is the **man** who will marry the bride (the **woman**).

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

You could use the term that your language uses to refer to the man who is getting married in a marriage ceremony or if you do not have a term for this in your language you could use a descriptive phrase to describe what a bridegroom is. Depending on the context you could translate the terms “bridegroom” and “groom” with descriptive phrases such as “a man getting married” or “a man who is being married” or “the man getting married.”

(See also: bride, marriage)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Isaiah 62:5](https://ref.ly/Isa62:5)
* [Joel 2:15–16](https://ref.ly/Joel2:15-Joel2:16)
* [John 3:30](https://ref.ly/John3:30)
* [Luke 5:35](https://ref.ly/Luke5:35)
* [Mark 2:19](https://ref.ly/Mark2:19)
* [Mark 2:20](https://ref.ly/Mark2:20)
* [Matthew 9:15](https://ref.ly/Matt9:15)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H2860, G35660

* **Associated Passages:** Exodus 4:25; Exodus 4:26; Isaiah 62:5; Matthew 9:15; Matthew 25:1; Matthew 25:5; Matthew 25:6; Matthew 25:10; Mark 2:19; Mark 2:20; Luke 5:34; Luke 5:35; John 2:9; John 3:29; John 3:30; Revelation 18:23; Joel 2:15-16
* **Associated Articles:** Bride (ID: `26415@UWTranslationWords`); Marriage (ID: `26854@UWTranslationWords`)


## Bronze (id: 26417)

bronze
======

Definition:
-----------

The term “bronze” refers to a kind of metal that is made from melting together the metals, copper and tin. It has a dark brown color, slightly red.

* Bronze resists water corrosion and is a good conductor of heat.
* In ancient times, bronze was used for making tools, weapons, artwork, altars, cooking pots, and soldiers’ armor, among other things.
* Many building materials for the tabernacle and temple were made of bronze.
* Idols of false gods were also often made of bronze metal.
* Bronze objects were made by first melting the bronze metal into a liquid and then pouring it into molds. This process was called “casting.”

(See also: How to Translate Unknowns)

(See also: armor, tabernacle, temple)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Kings 7:16](https://ref.ly/1Kgs7:16)
* [1 Samuel 17:37–38](https://ref.ly/1Sam17:37-1Sam17:38)
* [Daniel 2:44–45](https://ref.ly/Dan2:44-Dan2:45)
* [Exodus 25:3–7](https://ref.ly/Exod25:3-Exod25:7)
* [Revelation 1:15](https://ref.ly/Rev1:15)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H5153, H5154, H5174, H5178, G54700, G54740, G54750

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 4:22; Exodus 25:3; Exodus 26:11; Exodus 26:37; Exodus 27:2; Exodus 27:3; Exodus 27:4; Exodus 27:6; Exodus 27:10; Exodus 27:11; Exodus 27:17; Exodus 27:18; Exodus 27:19; Exodus 30:18; Exodus 31:4; Exodus 35:5; Exodus 35:16; Exodus 35:24; Exodus 35:32; Exodus 36:18; Exodus 36:38; Exodus 38:2; Exodus 38:3; Exodus 38:4; Exodus 38:5; Exodus 38:6; Exodus 38:8; Exodus 38:10; Exodus 38:11; Exodus 38:17; Exodus 38:19; Exodus 38:20; Exodus 38:29; Exodus 38:30; Exodus 39:39; 1 Kings 7:16; Ezra 8:27; Revelation 1:15; Revelation 2:18; Revelation 9:20; Revelation 18:12; Exodus 25:3-7; 1 Samuel 17:37-38; Daniel 2:44-45
* **Associated Articles:** Armor (ID: `26334@UWTranslationWords`); Tabernacle (ID: `27136@UWTranslationWords`); Temple (ID: `27142@UWTranslationWords`)


## Burnt Offering (id: 26418)

burnt offering, offering by fire
================================

Definition:
-----------

A “burnt offering” was a type of sacrifice to God that was burnt up by fire on an altar. It was offered to make atonement for the sins of the people. This was also called an “offering by fire.”

* Animals used for this offering were usually sheep or goats, but oxen and birds were also used.
* Except for the skin, the entire animal was burned up in this offering. The skin or hide was given to the priest.
* God commanded the Jewish people to offer burnt offerings two times every day.

(See also: altar, atonement, ox, priest, sacrifice)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Exodus 40:5–7](https://ref.ly/Exod40:5-Exod40:7)
* [Genesis 8:20](https://ref.ly/Gen8:20)
* [Genesis 22:1–3](https://ref.ly/Gen22:1-Gen22:3)
* [Leviticus 3:5](https://ref.ly/Lev3:5)
* [Mark 12:33](https://ref.ly/Mark12:33)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0801, H5930, H7133, H8548, G36460

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 8:20; Genesis 22:2; Genesis 22:3; Genesis 22:6; Genesis 22:7; Genesis 22:8; Genesis 22:13; Exodus 10:25; Exodus 18:12; Exodus 20:24; Exodus 24:5; Exodus 29:18; Exodus 29:25; Exodus 29:42; Exodus 30:9; Exodus 30:28; Exodus 31:9; Exodus 32:6; Exodus 35:16; Exodus 38:1; Exodus 40:6; Exodus 40:10; Exodus 40:29; Leviticus 3:5; Ezra 3:2; Ezra 3:3; Ezra 3:4; Ezra 3:5; Ezra 3:6; Ezra 6:9; Ezra 8:35; Nehemiah 10:33; Job 1:5; Job 42:8; Mark 12:33; Hebrews 10:6; Hebrews 10:8; Exodus 40:5-7; Genesis 22:1-3
* **Associated Articles:** Altar (ID: `26305@UWTranslationWords`); Atonement (ID: `26348@UWTranslationWords`); Cow (ID: `26481@UWTranslationWords`); Priest (ID: `26979@UWTranslationWords`); Sacrifice (ID: `27046@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Offering (ID: `keyterm:Offering`)

## Bury (id: 26419)

bury, buried, burial
====================

Definition:
-----------

The term “bury” refers to putting an object (usually a dead body) into a hole or other burial place and then covering it with dirt or stones, etc. The term “burial” is the act of burying something, or it can be used to describe a place where something has been buried.

* Often people bury a dead body by placing it into a deep hole in the ground and then covering it with dirt.
* Sometimes the dead body is placed in a box\-like structure, such as a coffin, before burying it.
* In Bible times, dead people were often buried in a cave or similar place. After Jesus died, his body was wrapped in cloths and placed in a stone tomb that was sealed with a large boulder.
* The terms “burial place” or “burial room” or “burial chamber” or “burial cave” always refer to a place where a dead body is buried.
* Other things can also be buried, such as when Achan buried silver and other things that he had stolen from Jericho.
* The phrase “buried his face” usually means “covered his face with his hands.”
* Sometimes the word “hide” can mean “bury” as when Achan hid things in the ground that he had stolen from Jericho. This meant he buried them in the ground.

(See also: Jericho, tomb)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [2 Kings 9:9–10](https://ref.ly/2Kgs9:9-2Kgs9:10)
* [Genesis 35:4–5](https://ref.ly/Gen35:4-Gen35:5)
* [Jeremiah 25:33](https://ref.ly/Jer25:33)
* [Luke 16:22](https://ref.ly/Luke16:22)
* [Matthew 27:7](https://ref.ly/Matt27:7)
* [Psalm 79:1–3](https://ref.ly/Ps79:1-Ps79:3)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H6900, H6912, H6913, G17790, G17800, G22900, G49160, G50270

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 15:15; Genesis 23:4; Genesis 23:6; Genesis 23:8; Genesis 23:11; Genesis 23:13; Genesis 23:15; Genesis 23:19; Genesis 25:9; Genesis 25:10; Genesis 35:4; Genesis 35:8; Genesis 35:19; Genesis 35:29; Genesis 47:29; Genesis 47:30; Genesis 48:7; Genesis 49:29; Genesis 49:31; Genesis 50:5; Genesis 50:6; Genesis 50:7; Genesis 50:13; Genesis 50:14; Ruth 1:17; Job 27:15; Jeremiah 25:33; Matthew 8:21; Matthew 8:22; Matthew 14:12; Matthew 26:12; Matthew 27:7; Mark 14:8; Luke 9:59; Luke 9:60; Luke 16:22; John 12:7; John 19:40; Acts 2:29; Acts 5:6; Acts 5:9; Acts 5:10; Romans 6:4; 1 Corinthians 15:4; Colossians 2:12; 2 Kings 9:9-10; Genesis 35:4-5; Psalms 79:1-3
* **Associated Articles:** Jericho (ID: `26754@UWTranslationWords`); Tomb (ID: `27165@UWTranslationWords`)

