# Translation Words (unfoldingWord)

**unfoldingWord® Translation Words** © 2022 unfoldingWord. Released under CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. *unfoldingWord® Translation Words* has been adapted in the following languages: Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文) from *unfoldingWord® Translation Words* © 2022 unfoldingWord. Released under CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license by Mission Mutual



--------------------------------


## Gabriel (id: 26621)

Gabriel
=======

Facts:
------

Gabriel is the name of one of God’s angels. He is mentioned by name several times, in both the Old and New Testaments.

* God sent Gabriel to tell the prophet Daniel the meaning of a vision he had seen.
* Another time, while Daniel was praying, the angel Gabriel flew to him and prophesied about what would happen in the future. Daniel described him as a “man.”
* In the New Testament it is recorded that Gabriel came to Zechariah to prophesy that his aged wife Elizabeth would have a son, John.
* Sixth months after that, Gabriel was sent to Mary to tell her that God would miraculously enable her to conceive a child who would be the “Son of God.” Gabriel told Mary to name her son “Jesus.”

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: angel, Daniel, Elizabeth, John (the Baptist), Mary, prophet, Son of God, Zechariah (NT))

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Daniel 8:15–17](https://ref.ly/Dan8:15-Dan8:17)
* [Daniel 9:21](https://ref.ly/Dan9:21)
* [Luke 1:19](https://ref.ly/Luke1:19)
* [Luke 1:26](https://ref.ly/Luke1:26)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1403, G10430

* **Associated Passages:** Daniel 9:21; Luke 1:19; Luke 1:26; Daniel 8:15-17
* **Associated Articles:** Angel (ID: `26317@UWTranslationWords`); Daniel (ID: `26500@UWTranslationWords`); Elizabeth (ID: `26557@UWTranslationWords`); John the Baptist (ID: `26770@UWTranslationWords`); Mary (ID: `26856@UWTranslationWords`); Prophet (ID: `26987@UWTranslationWords`); Son of God (ID: `27108@UWTranslationWords`); Zechariah NT (ID: `27227@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Gabriel (ID: `deity:Gabriel`)

## Gad (id: 26622)

Gad
===

Facts:
------

Gad was Jacob’s seventh son. He was Zilpah’s first son. His descendants became one of the tribes of Israel.

* The tribe descended from him was known as the “tribe of Gad” or “Gad” or “Gad.”
* The name Gad is similar to the Hebrew word for “good fortune.”
* The tribe of Gad settled on the eastern side of the Jordan River between the Sea of Galilee and the Dead Sea. This was to the north of Reuben and south of half of the tribe of Manasseh. When used as the name of a region of land, the term “Gad” refers to the land given to the tribe of Gad.
* Another man in the Bible named Gad was a prophet who confronted King David for his sin of taking a census of the Israelite people.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: twelve tribes of Israel, Jacob, Zilpah)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Chronicles 5:18](https://ref.ly/1Chr5:18)
* [Exodus 1:1–5](https://ref.ly/Exod1:1-Exod1:5)
* [Genesis 30:11](https://ref.ly/Gen30:11)
* [Joshua 1:12](https://ref.ly/Josh1:12)
* [Joshua 21:38](https://ref.ly/Josh21:38)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1410, H1425, G10450

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 30:11; Genesis 35:26; Genesis 46:16; Genesis 49:19; Exodus 1:4; Joshua 1:12; Joshua 21:38; 1 Chronicles 5:18; Revelation 7:5; Exodus 1:1-5
* **Associated Articles:** 12 Tribes of Israel (ID: `26274@UWTranslationWords`); Jacob (ID: `26739@UWTranslationWords`); Zilpah (ID: `27232@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Gad (ID: `person:Gad.2`); Gad (ID: `person:Gad`)

## Galatia (id: 26623)

Galatia, Galatians
==================

Facts:
------

In New Testament times, Galatia was a large Roman province located in the central part of what is now the country of Turkey.

* Part of Galatia bordered the Black Sea, which was to the north. It was also bordered by the provinces of Asia, Bithynia, Cappadocia, Celicia, and Pamphylia.
* The apostle Paul wrote a letter to the Christians who lived in the province of Galatia. This letter is the New Testament book called “Galatians.”
* One reason that Paul wrote his letter to the Galatians was to emphasize again the gospel of salvation by grace, not by works.
* The Jewish Christians there were incorrectly teaching the Gentile Christians there that it was necessary for believers to keep certain Jewish laws.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Asia, believe, Cilicia, good news, Paul, works)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Corinthians 16:1–2](https://ref.ly/1Cor16:1-1Cor16:2)
* [1 Peter 1:1–2](https://ref.ly/1Pet1:1-1Pet1:2)
* [2 Timothy 4:9–10](https://ref.ly/2Tim4:9-2Tim4:10)
* [Acts 16:6–8](https://ref.ly/Acts16:6-Acts16:8)
* [Galatians 1:1](https://ref.ly/Gal1:1)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: G10530, G10540

* **Associated Passages:** Acts 16:6; Acts 18:23; 1 Corinthians 16:1; Galatians 1:1; 2 Timothy 4:10; 1 Peter 1:1; Acts 16:6-8; 1 Peter 1:1-2; 1 Corinthians 16:1-2; 2 Timothy 4:9-10
* **Associated Articles:** Asia (ID: `26343@UWTranslationWords`); Believe (ID: `26381@UWTranslationWords`); Cilicia (ID: `26449@UWTranslationWords`); Good News (ID: `26654@UWTranslationWords`); Paul (ID: `26937@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Galatia (ID: `place:Galatia`)

## Galilee (id: 26624)

Galilee, Galilean
=================

Facts:
------

Galilee was the most northern region of Israel, just north of Samaria. A “Galilean” was a person who lived in Galilee or who lived in Galilee.

* Galilee, Samaria, and Judea were the three main provinces of Israel during New Testament times.
* Galilee is bordered on the east by a large lake called the “Sea of Galilee.”
* Jesus grew up and lived in the town of Nazareth in Galilee.
* Most of the miracles and teachings of Jesus took place in the region of Galilee.

(See also: Nazareth, Samaria, Sea of Galilee)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Acts 9:32](https://ref.ly/Acts9:32)
* [Acts 13:31](https://ref.ly/Acts13:31)
* [John 2:1–2](https://ref.ly/John2:1-John2:2)
* [John 4:3](https://ref.ly/John4:3)
* [Luke 13:3](https://ref.ly/Luke13:3)
* [Mark 3:7](https://ref.ly/Mark3:7)
* [Matthew 2:22–23](https://ref.ly/Matt2:22-Matt2:23)
* [Matthew 3:13–15](https://ref.ly/Matt3:13-Matt3:15)

Examples from the Bible stories:
--------------------------------

* **21:10** The prophet Isaiah said the Messiah would live in **Galilee**, comfort broken\-hearted people, and proclaim freedom to captives and release to prisoners.
* **26:1** After overcoming Satan’s temptations, Jesus returned in the power of the Holy Spirit to the region of **Galilee** where he lived.
* **39:6** Finally, the people said, “We know that you were with Jesus because you both are from **Galilee**.”
* **41:6** Then the angel told the women, “Go and tell the disciples, ‘Jesus has risen from the dead and he will go to **Galilee** ahead of you.’”

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1551, G10560, G10570

* **Associated Passages:** Matthew 2:22; Matthew 3:13; Matthew 4:12; Matthew 4:15; Matthew 4:18; Matthew 4:23; Matthew 4:25; Matthew 15:29; Matthew 17:22; Matthew 19:1; Matthew 21:11; Matthew 26:32; Matthew 26:69; Matthew 27:55; Matthew 28:7; Matthew 28:10; Matthew 28:16; Mark 1:9; Mark 1:14; Mark 1:16; Mark 1:28; Mark 1:39; Mark 3:7; Mark 6:21; Mark 7:31; Mark 9:30; Mark 14:28; Mark 14:70; Mark 15:41; Mark 16:7; Luke 1:26; Luke 2:4; Luke 2:39; Luke 3:1; Luke 4:14; Luke 4:31; Luke 5:17; Luke 8:26; Luke 13:1; Luke 13:2; Luke 13:3; Luke 17:11; Luke 22:59; Luke 23:5; Luke 23:6; Luke 23:49; Luke 23:55; Luke 24:6; John 1:43; John 2:1; John 2:11; John 4:3; John 4:43; John 4:45; John 4:46; John 4:47; John 4:54; John 6:1; John 7:1; John 7:9; John 7:41; John 7:52; John 12:21; John 21:2; Acts 1:11; Acts 2:7; Acts 5:37; Acts 9:31; Acts 9:32; Acts 10:37; Acts 13:31; Matthew 2:22-23; Matthew 3:13-15; John 2:1-2
* **Associated Articles:** Nazareth (ID: `26903@UWTranslationWords`); Samaria (ID: `27050@UWTranslationWords`); Sea of Galilee (ID: `27065@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Galilee (ID: `place:Galilee`); Judea (ID: `place:Judea`); Galileans (ID: `group:Galilee`)

## Gate (id: 26625)

gate, gate bars, gatekeeper, gateposts, gateway
===============================================

Definition:
-----------

The term “gate” refers to an access point in a fence, wall, or other kind of barrier that surrounds a house, property, city, etc.

* A city gate could be opened to allow people, animals, and cargo to travel in and out of the city.
* To protect the city, its walls and gates were thick and strong. Gates were closed and locked with a metal or wooden bar to prevent enemy soldiers from entering the city.
* A “bar” for a gate refers to a wood or metal bar that can be moved into place so that the doors of the gate cannot be opened from the outside.
* In Bible times, a city gate was often the social center for that town or city. It was a place where news of current events was exchanged between people, where business transactions occurred, and where civil judgments were made.

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* Depending on the context, other ways to translate “gate” could be “door” or “wall opening” or “barrier” or “entranceway.”
* The phrase “bars of the gate” could be translated as “gate bolts” or “wooden beams to lock the gate” or “metal locking rods of the gate.”

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Acts 9:24](https://ref.ly/Acts9:24)
* [Acts 10:18](https://ref.ly/Acts10:18)
* [Deuteronomy 21:18–19](https://ref.ly/Deut21:18-Deut21:19)
* [Genesis 19:1](https://ref.ly/Gen19:1)
* [Genesis 24:60](https://ref.ly/Gen24:60)
* [Matthew 7:13](https://ref.ly/Matt7:13)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1817, H5592, H6607, H8179, G23740, G44390, G44400

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 19:1; Genesis 22:17; Genesis 23:10; Genesis 23:18; Genesis 24:60; Genesis 28:17; Genesis 34:20; Genesis 34:24; Genesis 38:14; Exodus 20:10; Exodus 27:16; Exodus 32:26; Exodus 32:27; Exodus 35:17; Exodus 38:15; Exodus 38:18; Exodus 38:31; Exodus 39:40; Exodus 40:8; Exodus 40:33; Ruth 4:1; Ruth 4:10; Ruth 4:11; Ezra 2:42; Ezra 2:70; Ezra 7:7; Ezra 7:24; Ezra 10:24; Nehemiah 1:3; Nehemiah 2:3; Nehemiah 2:8; Nehemiah 2:13; Nehemiah 2:14; Nehemiah 2:15; Nehemiah 2:17; Nehemiah 3:1; Nehemiah 3:3; Nehemiah 3:6; Nehemiah 3:13; Nehemiah 3:14; Nehemiah 3:15; Nehemiah 3:26; Nehemiah 3:28; Nehemiah 3:29; Nehemiah 3:31; Nehemiah 3:32; Nehemiah 6:1; Nehemiah 7:3; Nehemiah 7:45; Nehemiah 7:73; Nehemiah 8:1; Nehemiah 8:3; Nehemiah 8:16; Nehemiah 10:28; Nehemiah 10:39; Nehemiah 11:19; Nehemiah 12:25; Nehemiah 12:30; Nehemiah 12:37; Nehemiah 12:39; Nehemiah 12:45; Nehemiah 12:47; Nehemiah 13:5; Nehemiah 13:19; Nehemiah 13:22; Job 3:10; Job 5:4; Job 29:7; Job 31:21; Job 31:32; Job 38:17; Job 41:14; Proverbs 1:21; Proverbs 8:3; Proverbs 14:19; Proverbs 18:19; Proverbs 22:22; Proverbs 24:7; Proverbs 31:23; Proverbs 31:31; Song of Songs 7:4; Song of Songs 8:9; Obadiah 1:11; Obadiah 1:13; Matthew 7:13; Matthew 7:14; Matthew 26:71; Luke 7:12; Luke 16:20; John 10:1; John 10:2; John 10:3; John 10:7; John 10:9; John 18:16; John 18:17; Acts 3:2; Acts 3:10; Acts 9:24; Acts 10:17; Acts 10:18; Acts 12:10; Acts 12:13; Acts 12:14; Acts 14:13; Acts 16:13; Hebrews 13:12; Revelation 21:12; Revelation 21:13; Revelation 21:15; Revelation 21:21; Revelation 21:25; Revelation 22:14; Deuteronomy 21:18-19

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Water Gate (ID: `place:WaterGate`); Door (ID: `realia:Door`); Fountain Gate (ID: `place:FountainGate`); Dung Gate (ID: `place:DungGate`); Valley Gate (ID: `place:ValleyGate`); Sheep Gate (ID: `place:SheepGate`); Beautiful Gate (ID: `place:BeautifulGate`); Fish Gate (ID: `place:FishGate`); Ephraim Gate (ID: `place:EphraimGate`); East Gate (ID: `place:EastGate`); Horse Gate (ID: `place:HorseGate`)

## Gath (id: 26626)

Gath, Gittite
=============

Facts:
------

Gath was one of the five major cities of the Philistines. It was located north of Ekron and east of Ashdod and Ashkelon.

* The Philistine warrior Goliath was from the city of Gath.
* During the time of Samuel, the Philistines stole the ark of the covenant from Israel and took it to their pagan temple at Ashdod. It was then moved to Gath and later to Ekron. But God punished the people of those cities with disease, so they sent it back to Israel again.
* When David was escaping from King Saul, he fled to Gath and lived there awhile with his two wives and with six hundred men who were his loyal followers.

(Translation suggestions: Translate Names)

(See also: Ashdod, Ashkelon, Ekron, Gaza, Goliath, Philistines)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Kings 2:39](https://ref.ly/1Kgs2:39)
* [1 Samuel 5:8–9](https://ref.ly/1Sam5:8-1Sam5:9)
* [2 Chronicles 26:6–8](https://ref.ly/2Chr26:6-2Chr26:8)
* [Joshua 11:21–22](https://ref.ly/Josh11:21-Josh11:22)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1661, H1663

* **Associated Passages:** 1 Kings 2:39; Joshua 11:21-22; 2 Chronicles 26:6-8; 1 Samuel 5:8-9
* **Associated Articles:** Ashdod (ID: `26339@UWTranslationWords`); Ashkelon (ID: `26342@UWTranslationWords`); Ekron (ID: `26549@UWTranslationWords`); Gaza (ID: `26627@UWTranslationWords`); Goliath (ID: `26651@UWTranslationWords`); Philistines (ID: `26958@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Gath (ID: `place:Gath`)

## Gaza (id: 26627)

Gaza
====

Facts:
------

During Bible times, Gaza was a prosperous Philistine city located on the coast of the Mediterranean Sea, about 38 kilometers south of Ashdod. It was one of the Philistines’ five major cities.

* Because of its location, Gaza was a key seaport where commercial activities took place between many different people groups and nations.
* Today, the city of Gaza is still an important seaport in the Gaza Strip, which is a region of land located along the coast of the Mediterranean Sea bordered by Israel on the north and east, and by Egypt on the south.
* Gaza was the city that the Philistines took Samson to after they had captured him.
* Philip the evangelist was walking along the desert road to Gaza when he met an Ethiopian eunuch.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Ashdod, Philip, Philistines, Ethiopia, Gath)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Kings 4:24–25](https://ref.ly/1Kgs4:24-1Kgs4:25)
* [Acts 8:26](https://ref.ly/Acts8:26)
* [Genesis 10:19](https://ref.ly/Gen10:19)
* [Joshua 10:40–41](https://ref.ly/Josh10:40-Josh10:41)
* [Judges 6:3–4](https://ref.ly/Judg6:3-Judg6:4)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H5804, H5841, G10480

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 10:19; Acts 8:26; 1 Kings 4:24-25; Joshua 10:40-41; Judges 6:3-4
* **Associated Articles:** Ashdod (ID: `26339@UWTranslationWords`); Ethiopia (ID: `26571@UWTranslationWords`); Gath (ID: `26626@UWTranslationWords`); Philip (ID: `26954@UWTranslationWords`); Philistines (ID: `26958@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Gaza (ID: `place:Gaza`)

## Generation (id: 26630)

generation
==========

Definition:
-----------

The term “generation” in this sense refers to a period of time approximately equal to the lifetime of a person. This could be as long as 100 years. This period of time also came to be measured by the time between the adulthood of one person and the adulthood of his or her offspring, or a 30–40\-year time span.

Translation Suggestions
-----------------------

* When referring to the past, “generations” could be translated as “during the times of our ancestors” or “when people lived before us.”
* When referring to the future, “generations” could be translated as “lifespans” or “times of people who will come afterwards” or “when our descendants are living.”
* The phrase “in his own generation” could be translated as “while he lived” or “during his time”
* The expression “from generation to generation” or “from one generation to the next” could be translated as “from the time of people living now and for always” or “as long as people live on the earth” or “from now to all future time periods” or “for all time.”

(See also: descendant, ancestor)

Bible References:
-----------------

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s:

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 2:4; Genesis 5:1; Genesis 6:9; Genesis 7:1; Genesis 9:12; Genesis 10:1; Genesis 10:32; Genesis 11:10; Genesis 11:27; Genesis 15:16; Genesis 17:7; Genesis 17:9; Genesis 17:12; Genesis 25:12; Genesis 25:13; Genesis 25:19; Genesis 36:1; Genesis 36:9; Genesis 37:2; Exodus 1:6; Exodus 3:15; Exodus 12:14; Exodus 12:17; Exodus 12:42; Exodus 17:16; Exodus 27:21; Exodus 29:42; Exodus 30:8; Exodus 30:10; Exodus 30:21; Exodus 30:31; Exodus 31:13; Exodus 31:16; Exodus 40:15; Ruth 4:18; Job 8:8; Job 42:16; Proverbs 27:24; Proverbs 30:11; Proverbs 30:12; Proverbs 30:13; Proverbs 30:14; Matthew 1:17; Matthew 11:16; Matthew 12:39; Matthew 12:41; Matthew 12:42; Matthew 12:45; Matthew 16:4; Matthew 17:17; Matthew 23:36; Matthew 24:34; Mark 8:12; Mark 8:38; Mark 9:19; Mark 13:30; Luke 1:48; Luke 1:50; Luke 7:31; Luke 9:41; Luke 11:29; Luke 11:30; Luke 11:31; Luke 11:32; Luke 11:50; Luke 11:51; Luke 16:8; Luke 17:25; Luke 21:32; Acts 2:40; Acts 8:33; Acts 13:36; Acts 14:16; Acts 15:21; Ephesians 3:5; Ephesians 3:21; Philippians 2:15; Colossians 1:26; 1 Timothy 6:17; Hebrews 3:10
* **Associated Articles:** Descendant (ID: `26518@UWTranslationWords`)


## Generation-Group of Descendants (id: 26628)

generation
==========

Definition:
-----------

The term “generation” in this sense refers to a group of descendants who are born to a set of parents. For example, if a certain couple is counted as the first generation, then their children are the second generation, their grandchildren are the third generation, etc. in their family line.

Translation Suggestions
-----------------------

* “Generations” could be translated as “descendants” or “descendant groups” or “children and their children.”
* The phrase “throughout your generations” could be translated as “for every one of your descendants” or “to your children and to every one after them”
* “A generation to come will serve him; they will tell the next generation about Yahweh” could be translated as “Many people in the future will serve Yahweh and will tell their children and grandchildren about him.”

(See also: descendant, ancestor)

Bible References:
-----------------

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s:

* **Associated Articles:** Descendant (ID: `26518@UWTranslationWords`)


## Generation-People Who Live in Same Time Period (id: 26629)

generation
==========

Definition:
-----------

The term “generation” in this sense refers to people who are alive at the same time. These people generally share the same culture, experiences, and way of life.

Translation Suggestions
-----------------------

* The phrase “the generation of his fathers” could be translated as “his ancestors” or “those who have lived before him.”
* The phrase “this generation” or “people of this generation” could be translated as “the people living now” or “you people.”
* The phrase “future generations” could be translated as “those living after us” or “people living at a later time.”

Bible References:
-----------------

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s:



## Gentile (id: 26631)

Gentile
=======

Facts:
------

The term “Gentile” refers to anyone who is not a Jew. Gentiles are people who are not descendants of Jacob.

* In the Bible, the term “uncircumcised” is also used figuratively to refer to Gentiles because many of them did not circumcise their male children as the Israelites did.
* Because God chose the Jews to be his special people, they thought of the Gentiles as outsiders who could never be God’s people.
* The Jews were also called “Israelites” or “Hebrews” at different times in history. They referred to anyone else as a “Gentile.”
* Gentile could also be translated as “not a Jew” or “non\-Jewish” or “not an Israelite” (Old Testament) or “non\-Jew.”.
* Traditionally, Jews would neither eat with nor associate with Gentiles, which at first caused problems within the early church.

(See also: Israel, Jacob, Jew)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Acts 9:13–16](https://ref.ly/Acts9:13-Acts9:16)
* [Acts 14:5–7](https://ref.ly/Acts14:5-Acts14:7)
* [Galatians 2:16](https://ref.ly/Gal2:16)
* [Luke 2:32](https://ref.ly/Luke2:32)
* [Matthew 5:47](https://ref.ly/Matt5:47)
* [Matthew 6:5–7](https://ref.ly/Matt6:5-Matt6:7)
* [Romans 11:25](https://ref.ly/Rom11:25)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1471, G14820, G14840, G16720

* **Associated Passages:** Matthew 4:15; Matthew 5:47; Matthew 6:7; Matthew 6:32; Matthew 10:5; Matthew 10:18; Matthew 12:18; Matthew 12:21; Matthew 18:17; Matthew 20:19; Matthew 20:25; Mark 10:33; Mark 10:42; Luke 2:32; Luke 18:32; Luke 21:24; Luke 22:25; Acts 4:25; Acts 4:27; Acts 9:15; Acts 10:45; Acts 11:1; Acts 11:18; Acts 13:46; Acts 13:47; Acts 13:48; Acts 14:2; Acts 14:5; Acts 14:27; Acts 15:3; Acts 15:7; Acts 15:12; Acts 15:14; Acts 15:17; Acts 15:19; Acts 15:23; Acts 18:6; Acts 21:11; Acts 21:19; Acts 21:21; Acts 21:25; Acts 22:21; Acts 26:17; Acts 26:20; Acts 26:23; Acts 28:28; Romans 1:5; Romans 1:13; Romans 2:14; Romans 2:24; Romans 3:29; Romans 9:24; Romans 9:30; Romans 11:11; Romans 11:12; Romans 11:13; Romans 11:25; Romans 15:9; Romans 15:10; Romans 15:11; Romans 15:12; Romans 15:16; Romans 15:18; Romans 15:27; Romans 16:4; 1 Corinthians 1:23; 1 Corinthians 10:20; 2 Corinthians 11:26; Galatians 2:16; Ephesians 2:11; Ephesians 3:1; Ephesians 3:6; Ephesians 3:8; Ephesians 4:17; Colossians 1:27; 1 Thessalonians 2:16; 1 Thessalonians 4:5; 1 Timothy 2:7; 2 Timothy 4:17; 1 Peter 2:12; 1 Peter 4:3; 3 John 1:7; Revelation 11:2; Acts 9:13-16; Acts 14:5-7; Matthew 6:5-7
* **Associated Articles:** Israel (ID: `26737@UWTranslationWords`); Jacob (ID: `26739@UWTranslationWords`); Jew (ID: `26760@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Gentiles (ID: `group:Gentile`)

## Gerar (id: 26632)

Gerar
=====

Facts:
------

Gerar was a city and region in the land of Canaan, located southwest of Hebron and northwest of Beersheba.

* King Abimelech was the ruler of Gerar when Abraham and Sarah settled there.
* The Philistines dominated the region of Gerar during the time that the Israelites were living in Canaan.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Abimelech, Beersheba, Hebron, Philistines)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [2 Chronicles 14:12–13](https://ref.ly/2Chr14:12-2Chr14:13)
* [Genesis 20:1–3](https://ref.ly/Gen20:1-Gen20:3)
* [Genesis 26:1](https://ref.ly/Gen26:1)
* [Genesis 26:6](https://ref.ly/Gen26:6)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1642

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 10:19; Genesis 20:1; Genesis 20:2; Genesis 26:1; Genesis 26:6; Genesis 26:17; Genesis 26:20; Genesis 26:26; 2 Chronicles 14:12-13; Genesis 20:1-3
* **Associated Articles:** Abimelech (ID: `26279@UWTranslationWords`); Beersheba (ID: `26377@UWTranslationWords`); Hebron (ID: `26685@UWTranslationWords`); Philistines (ID: `26958@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Gerar (ID: `place:Gerar`)

## Geshur (id: 26633)

Geshur, Geshurites
==================

Definition:
-----------

During the time of King David, Geshur was a small kingdom located on the east side of the Sea of Galilee between the countries of Israel and Aram.

* King David married Maacah, the daughter of Geshur’s king, and she bore him a son, Absalom.
* After murdering his half\-brother Amnon, Absalom fled northeast from Jerusalem to Geshur, a distance of about 140 kilometers. He stayed there three years.

(See also: Absalom, Amnon, Aram, Sea of Galilee)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Chronicles 2:23](https://ref.ly/1Chr2:23)
* [2 Samuel 3:2–3](https://ref.ly/2Sam3:2-2Sam3:3)
* [Deuteronomy 3:14](https://ref.ly/Deut3:14)
* [Joshua 12:3–5](https://ref.ly/Josh12:3-Josh12:5)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1650

* **Associated Passages:** Deuteronomy 3:14; 1 Chronicles 2:23; 2 Samuel 3:2-3; Joshua 12:3-5
* **Associated Articles:** Absalom (ID: `26283@UWTranslationWords`); Amnon (ID: `26311@UWTranslationWords`); Aram (ID: `26329@UWTranslationWords`); Sea of Galilee (ID: `27065@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Geshur (ID: `place:Geshur`); Geshurites (ID: `group:Geshur`)

## Gethsemane (id: 26634)

Gethsemane
==========

Facts:
------

Gethsemane was a garden of olive trees east of Jerusalem beyond the Kidron valley and near the Mount of Olives.

* The garden of Gethsemane was a place where Jesus and his followers would go to be alone and rest, away from the crowds.
* It was in Gethsemane that Jesus prayed in deep sorrow, before being arrested there by Jewish leaders.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Judas Iscariot, Kidron Valley, Mount of Olives)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Mark 14:32](https://ref.ly/Mark14:32)
* [Matthew 26:36](https://ref.ly/Matt26:36)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: G10680

* **Associated Passages:** Matthew 26:36; Mark 14:32
* **Associated Articles:** Judas Iscariot (ID: `26784@UWTranslationWords`); Kidron Valley (ID: `26794@UWTranslationWords`); Mount of Olives (ID: `26892@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Gethsemane (ID: `place:Gethsemane`)

## Giant (id: 26635)

giant
=====

Definition:
-----------

The word “giant” usually refers to a person who is extremely tall and strong. 

* Goliath, a Philistine soldier who fought David, was called a giant because he was a very tall, large, and strong man.
* The Israelite spies who explored the land of Canaan said that the people living there were like giants.

(See also: Canaan, Goliath, Philistines)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Genesis 6:4](https://ref.ly/Gen6:4)
* [Numbers 13:32–33](https://ref.ly/Num13:32-Num13:33)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1368, H5303, H7497

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 6:4; Numbers 13:32-33
* **Associated Articles:** Canaan (ID: `26430@UWTranslationWords`); Goliath (ID: `26651@UWTranslationWords`); Philistines (ID: `26958@UWTranslationWords`)


## Gibeah (id: 26636)

Gibeah
======

Facts:
------

Gibeah was a city located north of Jerusalem and south of Bethel.

* Gibeah was in the territory of the tribe of Benjamin.
* It was the site of a huge battle between the Benjamites and Israel.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Benjamin, Bethel, Jerusalem)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Samuel 10:26–27](https://ref.ly/1Sam10:26-1Sam10:27)
* [2 Samuel 21:6](https://ref.ly/2Sam21:6)
* [Hosea 9:9](https://ref.ly/Hos9:9)
* [Judges 19:12–13](https://ref.ly/Judg19:12-Judg19:13)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1387, H1389, H1390, H1394

* **Associated Passages:** 2 Samuel 21:6; Hosea 9:9; 1 Samuel 10:26-27; Judges 19:12-13
* **Associated Articles:** Benjamin (ID: `26384@UWTranslationWords`); Bethel (ID: `26387@UWTranslationWords`); Jerusalem (ID: `26756@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Gibeah (ID: `place:Gibeah.1`); Gibeah (ID: `place:Gibeah`); Gibeah (ID: `place:Gibeah.2`)

## Gibeon (id: 26637)

Gibeon, Gibeonite
=================

Facts:
------

Gibeon was a city that was located about 13 kilometers northwest of Jerusalem. The people living in Gibeon were the Gibeonites.

* When the Gibeonites heard about how the Israelites had destroyed the cities of Jericho and Ai, they were afraid.
* So the Gibeonites came to the leaders of Israel at Gilgal and pretended to be people from a far\-away country.
* The Israelite leaders were deceived and made an agreement with the Gibeonites that they would protect them and not destroy them.

(See also: Gilgal, Jericho, Jerusalem)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Chronicles 8:29](https://ref.ly/1Chr8:29)
* [1 Kings 3:4–5](https://ref.ly/1Kgs3:4-1Kgs3:5)
* [2 Samuel 2:12–13](https://ref.ly/2Sam2:12-2Sam2:13)
* [Joshua 9:3–5](https://ref.ly/Josh9:3-Josh9:5)

Examples from the Bible stories:
--------------------------------

* **15:6** But one of the Canaanite people groups, called the **Gibeonites**, lied to Joshua and said they were from a place far from Canaan.
* **15:7** Sometime later, the kings of another people group in Canaan, the Amorites, heard that the **Gibeonites** had made a peace treaty with the Israelites, so they combined their armies into one large army and attacked **Gibeon**.
* **15:8** So Joshua gathered the Israelite army and they marched all night to reach the **Gibeonites**.

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1391, H1393

* **Associated Passages:** 1 Chronicles 8:29; Nehemiah 3:7; 1 Kings 3:4-5; 2 Samuel 2:12-13; Joshua 9:3-5
* **Associated Articles:** Gilgal (ID: `26640@UWTranslationWords`); Jericho (ID: `26754@UWTranslationWords`); Jerusalem (ID: `26756@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Gibeon (ID: `place:Gibeon`); Gibeonites (ID: `group:Gibeon`)

## Gideon (id: 26638)

Gideon
======

Facts:
------

Gideon was an Israelite man whom God raised up to deliver the Israelites from their enemies.

* During the time when Gideon lived, a people group called the Midianites kept attacking the Israelites and destroying their crops.
* Even though Gideon was afraid, God used him to lead the Israelites to fight against the Midianites and defeat them.
* Gideon also obeyed God by taking down altars to the false gods Baal and Asherah.
* He not only led the people in defeating their enemies but also encouraged them to obey and worship Yahweh, the one true God.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Baal, Asherah, deliver, Midian, Yahweh)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Hebrews 11:32–34](https://ref.ly/Heb11:32-Heb11:34)
* [Judges 6:11](https://ref.ly/Judg6:11)
* [Judges 6:23](https://ref.ly/Judg6:23)
* [Judges 8:17](https://ref.ly/Judg8:17)

Examples from the Bible stories:
--------------------------------

* **16:5** The angel of Yahweh came to **Gideon** and said, “God is with you, mighty warrior. Go and save Israel from the Midianites.”
* **16:6** **Gideon’s** father had an altar dedicated to an idol. God told **Gideon** to tear down that altar.
* **16:8** There were so many of them (Midianites) that they could not be counted. **Gideon** called the Israelites together to fight them.
* **16:8** **Gideon** asked God for two signs so he could be sure that God would use him to save Israel.
* **16:10** 32,000 Israelite soldiers came to **Gideon**, but God told him this was too many.
* **16:12** Then **Gideon** returned to his soldiers and gave each of them a horn, a clay pot, and a torch.
* **16:15** The people wanted to make **Gideon** their king.
* **16:16** Then **Gideon** used the gold to make a special garment like the high priest used to wear. But the people started worshiping it as if it were an idol.

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1439, H1441

* **Associated Passages:** Judges 6:11; Judges 6:23; Judges 8:17; Hebrews 11:32; Hebrews 11:32-34
* **Associated Articles:** Asherim (ID: `26341@UWTranslationWords`); Baal (ID: `26355@UWTranslationWords`); Deliverer (ID: `26515@UWTranslationWords`); Midian (ID: `26876@UWTranslationWords`); Yahweh (ID: `27218@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Gideon (ID: `person:Gideon`)

## Gilead (id: 26639)

Gilead, Gileadite
=================

Definition:
-----------

Gilead was the name of a mountainous region east of the Jordan river where the Israelite tribes of Gad, Reuben, and Manasseh lived.

* This region was also referred to as the “hill country of Gilead” or “Mount Gilead.”
* “Gilead” was also the name of several men in the Old Testament. One of these men was the grandson of Manasseh. Another Gilead was the father of Jephthah.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Gad, Jephthah, Manasseh, Reuben, twelve tribes of Israel)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Chronicles 2:22](https://ref.ly/1Chr2:22)
* [1 Samuel 11:1](https://ref.ly/1Sam11:1)
* [Amos 1:3](https://ref.ly/Amos1:3)
* [Deuteronomy 2:36–37](https://ref.ly/Deut2:36-Deut2:37)
* [Genesis 31:21](https://ref.ly/Gen31:21)
* [Genesis 37:25–26](https://ref.ly/Gen37:25-Gen37:26)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1568, H1569

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 31:21; Genesis 31:23; Genesis 31:25; Genesis 37:25; 1 Samuel 11:1; 1 Chronicles 2:22; Nehemiah 7:63; Song of Songs 6:5; Amos 1:3; Obadiah 1:19; Deuteronomy 2:36-37; Genesis 37:25-26
* **Associated Articles:** 12 Tribes of Israel (ID: `26274@UWTranslationWords`); Gad (ID: `26622@UWTranslationWords`); Jephthah (ID: `26752@UWTranslationWords`); Manasseh (ID: `26851@UWTranslationWords`); Reuben (ID: `27032@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Gilead (ID: `person:Gilead.2`); Gilead (ID: `person:Gilead.3`); Gilead (ID: `person:Gilead`); Gilead (ID: `place:Gilead`)

## Gilgal (id: 26640)

Gilgal
======

Facts:
------

Gilgal was a town north of Jericho and was the first place that the Israelites camped after crossing the Jordan River to enter Canaan.

* At Gilgal, Joshua set up twelve stones taken from the dry river bed of the Jordan River that they had just crossed over.
* Gilgal was the city that Elijah and Elisha were leaving as they crossed the Jordan when Elijah was taken up to heaven.
* There were also several other places called “Gilgal” in the Old Testament.
* The word “gilgal” means “circle of stones,” perhaps referring to a place where a circular altar was built.
* In the Old Testament, this name almost always occurs as “the gilgal.” This may indicate that it was not a specific place name but rather was a description of a certain kind of place.

(Translation suggestions: Translate Names)

(See also: Elijah, Elisha, Jericho, Jordan River)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Samuel 7:15–17](https://ref.ly/1Sam7:15-1Sam7:17)
* [2 Kings 2:1–2](https://ref.ly/2Kgs2:1-2Kgs2:2)
* [Hosea 4:15](https://ref.ly/Hos4:15)
* [Judges 2:1](https://ref.ly/Judg2:1)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1537

* **Associated Passages:** Judges 2:1; Nehemiah 12:29; Hosea 4:15; 1 Samuel 7:15-17; 2 Kings 2:1-2
* **Associated Articles:** Elijah (ID: `26555@UWTranslationWords`); Elisha (ID: `26556@UWTranslationWords`); Jericho (ID: `26754@UWTranslationWords`); Jordan River (ID: `26775@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Gilgal (ID: `place:Gilgal.4`); Galilee (ID: `place:Galilee`); Gilgal (ID: `place:Gilgal.3`); Gilgal (ID: `place:Gilgal.2`)

## Gird (id: 26641)

gird, girded, wrapped around, tied up, belt, tuck in belt, put belt around
==========================================================================

Definition:
-----------

The term “gird” means to fasten something around something else. It often refers to using a belt or sash around the waist to keep a robe or tunic in place.

* The common biblical phrase, “gird up the loins” refers to tucking the bottom of a garment into a belt to allow a person to move more freely, usually to do work.
* This phrase can also mean “get ready to work” or to be prepared to do something difficult.
* The expression “gird up the loins” could be translated using an expression in the target language that has the same meaning. Or it could be translated figuratively as “prepare yourself for action” or “get yourself ready.”
* The term “girded with” could be translated as “encircled by” or “wrapped with” or “belted with.”

(See also: loins)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Peter 1:13](https://ref.ly/1Pet1:13)
* [Job 38:3](https://ref.ly/Job38:3)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0640, H0247, H2290, H2296, H8151, G03280, G12410, G40240

* **Associated Passages:** Exodus 12:11; Nehemiah 4:18; Job 36:8; Job 36:13; Job 38:3; Proverbs 30:31; Proverbs 31:17; Song of Songs 7:5; John 13:4; John 13:5; John 21:7; John 21:18; Acts 12:8; 1 Peter 1:13; Revelation 1:13; Revelation 15:6
* **Associated Articles:** Loins (ID: `26830@UWTranslationWords`)


## Girgashites (id: 26642)

Girgashites
===========

Facts:
------

The Girgashites were a people group living near the Sea of Galilee in the land of Canaan.

* They were descendants of Ham’s son Canaan and so were one of the many people groups who were also known as “Canaanites.”
* God promised the Israelites that he would help them defeat the Girgashites and other Canaanite people groups.
* Like all the Canaanite peoples, the Girgashites worshiped false gods and did immoral things as part of that worship.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Canaan, Ham, Noah)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Chronicles 1:14](https://ref.ly/1Chr1:14)
* [Deuteronomy 7:1](https://ref.ly/Deut7:1)
* [Genesis 10:16](https://ref.ly/Gen10:16)
* [Joshua 3:9–11](https://ref.ly/Josh3:9-Josh3:11)
* [Joshua 24:11–12](https://ref.ly/Josh24:11-Josh24:12)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1622

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 10:16; Genesis 15:21; Deuteronomy 7:1; 1 Chronicles 1:14; Nehemiah 9:8; Joshua 3:9-11; Joshua 24:11-12
* **Associated Articles:** Canaan (ID: `26430@UWTranslationWords`); Ham (ID: `26671@UWTranslationWords`); Noah (ID: `26913@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Girgashites (ID: `group:Girgashites`)

## Glean (id: 26643)

glean, gleanings
================

Definition:
-----------

The term “glean” means to go through a field or orchard and pick up whatever grain or fruit the harvesters have left behind.

* God commanded the Israelites to let the widows, poor people, and foreigners glean the leftover grain in order to provide food for themselves.
* Sometimes the owner of the field would allow the gleaners to go directly behind the harvesters to glean, which enabled them to glean much more of the grain. A clear example of how this worked is in the story of Ruth, who was generously allowed to glean among the harvesters in the fields of her relative Boaz.
* Other ways to translate “glean” can be “pick up” or “gather” or “collect.”

(See also: Boaz, grain, harvest, Ruth)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Deuteronomy 24:21–22](https://ref.ly/Deut24:21-Deut24:22)
* [Isaiah 17:4–5](https://ref.ly/Isa17:4-Isa17:5)
* [Job 24:6](https://ref.ly/Job24:6)
* [Ruth 2:2](https://ref.ly/Ruth2:2)
* [Ruth 2:15](https://ref.ly/Ruth2:15)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H3950, H3951, H5953, H5955

* **Associated Passages:** Ruth 2:2; Ruth 2:3; Ruth 2:7; Ruth 2:8; Ruth 2:15; Ruth 2:16; Ruth 2:17; Ruth 2:18; Ruth 2:19; Ruth 2:23; Job 24:6; Obadiah 1:5; Deuteronomy 24:21-22; Isaiah 17:4-5
* **Associated Articles:** Boaz (ID: `26406@UWTranslationWords`); Grain (ID: `26659@UWTranslationWords`); Harvest (ID: `26681@UWTranslationWords`); Ruth (ID: `27043@UWTranslationWords`)


## Glory (id: 26644)

glory, glorious, glorify
========================

Definition:
-----------

The term “glory” is a general term for a family of concepts including value, worth, importance, honor, splendor, or majesty. The term “glorify” means to ascribe glory to someone or something, or to show or tell how glorious something or someone is.

* In the Bible, the term “glory” is especially used to describe God, who is more valuable, more worthy, more important, more honorable, more splendid, and more majestic than anyone or anything in the universe. Everything about his character reveals his glory.
* People can glorify God by telling about the wonderful things he has done. They can also glorify God by living in accordance with God’s character, because doing so shows to others his value, worth, importance, honor, splendor, and majesty.
* The expression to “glory in” means to boast about or take pride in something.

### Old Testament

* The specific phrase “the glory of Yahweh” in the Old Testament usually refers to some perceptible manifestation of Yahweh’s presence in a particular location.

### New Testament

* God the Father will glorify God the Son by revealing to all people the full extent of how glorious Jesus is.
* Everyone who believes in Christ will be glorified with him. This use of the term “glorify” carries a unique meaning. It means that when people who believe in Christ are raised to life, they will be changed physically to be like Jesus as he appeared after his resurrection.

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* Depending on the context, different ways to translate “glory” could include “splendor” or “majesty” or “awesome greatness” or “extreme value.”
* The term “glorious” could be translated as “full of glory” or “extremely valuable” or “brightly shining” or “awesomely majestic.”
* The expression “give glory to God” could be translated as “honor God’s greatness” or “praise God because of his splendor” or “tell others how great God is.”
* The expression “glory in” could also be translated as “praise” or “take pride in” or “boast about” or “take pleasure in.”
* “Glorify” could also be translated as “give glory to” or “bring glory to” or “cause to appear great.”
* The phrase “glorify God” could also be translated as “praise God” or “talk about God’s greatness” or “show how great God is” or “honor God (by obeying him).”
* The term “be glorified” could also be translated as “be shown to be very great” or “be praised” or “be exalted.”

(See also: honor, majesty, exalt, obey, praise)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Exodus 24:17](https://ref.ly/Exod24:17)
* [Numbers 14:9–10](https://ref.ly/Num14:9-Num14:10)
* [Isaiah 35:2](https://ref.ly/Isa35:2)
* [Luke 18:43](https://ref.ly/Luke18:43)
* [Luke 2:9](https://ref.ly/Luke2:9)
* [John 12:28](https://ref.ly/John12:28)
* [Acts 3:13–14](https://ref.ly/Acts3:13-Acts3:14)
* [Acts 7:1–3](https://ref.ly/Acts7:1-Acts7:3)
* [Romans 8:17](https://ref.ly/Rom8:17)
* [1 Corinthians 6:19–20](https://ref.ly/1Cor6:19-1Cor6:20)
* [Philippians 2:14–16](https://ref.ly/Phil2:14-Phil2:16)
* [Philippians 4:19](https://ref.ly/Phil4:19)
* [Colossians 3:1–4](https://ref.ly/Col3:1-Col3:4)
* [1 Thessalonians 2:5](https://ref.ly/1Thess2:5)
* [James 2:1–4](https://ref.ly/Jas2:1-Jas2:4)
* [1 Peter 4:15–16](https://ref.ly/1Pet4:15-1Pet4:16)
* [Revelation 15:4](https://ref.ly/Rev15:4)

Examples from the Bible stories:
--------------------------------

* **23:7** Suddenly, the skies were filled with angels praising God, saying, “**Glory** to God in heaven and peace on earth to the people he favors!”
* **25:6** Then Satan showed Jesus all the kingdoms of the world and all their **glory** and said, “I will give you all this if you bow down and worship me.”
* **37:1** When Jesus heard this news, he said, “This sickness will not end in death, but it is for the **glory** of God.”
* **37:8** Jesus responded, “Did I not tell you that you would see God’s **glory** if you believe in me?”

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0117, H0142, H0155, H0215, H1342, H1921, H1926, H1935, H1984, H3367, H3513, H3519, H3520, H6286, H6643, H7623, H8597, G13910, G13920, G17400, G17410, G27440, G48880

* **Associated Passages:** Exodus 8:9; Exodus 14:4; Exodus 14:17; Exodus 14:18; Exodus 16:7; Exodus 16:10; Exodus 24:16; Exodus 24:17; Exodus 28:2; Exodus 28:40; Exodus 29:43; Exodus 33:18; Exodus 33:22; Exodus 40:34; Exodus 40:35; Nehemiah 9:5; Job 19:9; Job 29:20; Proverbs 25:2; Isaiah 35:2; Haggai 2:7; Haggai 2:9; Matthew 4:8; Matthew 5:16; Matthew 6:2; Matthew 6:29; Matthew 9:8; Matthew 15:31; Matthew 16:27; Matthew 19:28; Matthew 24:30; Matthew 25:31; Mark 2:12; Mark 8:38; Mark 10:37; Mark 13:26; Luke 2:9; Luke 2:14; Luke 2:20; Luke 2:32; Luke 4:6; Luke 4:15; Luke 5:25; Luke 5:26; Luke 7:16; Luke 9:26; Luke 9:31; Luke 9:32; Luke 12:27; Luke 13:13; Luke 13:17; Luke 14:10; Luke 17:15; Luke 17:18; Luke 18:43; Luke 19:38; Luke 21:27; Luke 23:47; Luke 24:26; John 1:14; John 2:11; John 5:41; John 5:44; John 7:18; John 7:39; John 8:50; John 8:54; John 9:24; John 11:4; John 11:40; John 12:16; John 12:23; John 12:28; John 12:41; John 12:43; John 13:31; John 13:32; John 14:13; John 15:8; John 16:14; John 17:1; John 17:4; John 17:5; John 17:10; John 17:22; John 17:24; John 21:19; Acts 3:13; Acts 4:21; Acts 7:2; Acts 7:55; Acts 11:18; Acts 12:23; Acts 13:48; Acts 21:20; Acts 22:11; Romans 1:21; Romans 1:23; Romans 2:7; Romans 2:10; Romans 3:7; Romans 3:23; Romans 4:20; Romans 5:2; Romans 6:4; Romans 8:17; Romans 8:18; Romans 8:21; Romans 8:30; Romans 9:4; Romans 9:23; Romans 11:13; Romans 11:36; Romans 15:6; Romans 15:7; Romans 15:9; Romans 16:27; 1 Corinthians 2:7; 1 Corinthians 2:8; 1 Corinthians 6:20; 1 Corinthians 10:31; 1 Corinthians 11:7; 1 Corinthians 11:15; 1 Corinthians 12:26; 1 Corinthians 15:40; 1 Corinthians 15:41; 1 Corinthians 15:43; 2 Corinthians 1:20; 2 Corinthians 3:7; 2 Corinthians 3:8; 2 Corinthians 3:9; 2 Corinthians 3:10; 2 Corinthians 3:11; 2 Corinthians 3:18; 2 Corinthians 4:4; 2 Corinthians 4:6; 2 Corinthians 4:15; 2 Corinthians 4:17; 2 Corinthians 6:8; 2 Corinthians 8:19; 2 Corinthians 8:23; 2 Corinthians 9:13; Ephesians 1:6; Ephesians 1:12; Ephesians 1:14; Ephesians 1:17; Ephesians 1:18; Ephesians 3:13; Ephesians 3:16; Ephesians 3:21; Ephesians 5:27; Philippians 1:11; Philippians 2:11; Philippians 3:19; Philippians 3:21; Philippians 4:19; Philippians 4:20; Colossians 1:11; Colossians 1:27; Colossians 3:4; 1 Thessalonians 2:5; 1 Thessalonians 2:6; 1 Thessalonians 2:12; 1 Thessalonians 2:20; 2 Thessalonians 1:9; 2 Thessalonians 1:10; 2 Thessalonians 1:12; 2 Thessalonians 2:14; 2 Thessalonians 3:1; 1 Timothy 1:11; 1 Timothy 1:17; 1 Timothy 3:16; 2 Timothy 2:10; 2 Timothy 4:18; Titus 2:13; Hebrews 1:3; Hebrews 2:7; Hebrews 2:9; Hebrews 2:10; Hebrews 3:3; Hebrews 5:5; Hebrews 9:5; Hebrews 13:21; James 2:1; 1 Peter 1:7; 1 Peter 1:8; 1 Peter 1:11; 1 Peter 1:21; 1 Peter 1:24; 1 Peter 2:12; 1 Peter 4:11; 1 Peter 4:13; 1 Peter 4:14; 1 Peter 4:16; 1 Peter 5:1; 1 Peter 5:4; 1 Peter 5:10; 2 Peter 1:3; 2 Peter 1:17; 2 Peter 2:10; 2 Peter 3:18; Jude 1:8; Jude 1:24; Jude 1:25; Revelation 1:6; Revelation 4:9; Revelation 4:11; Revelation 5:12; Revelation 5:13; Revelation 7:12; Revelation 11:13; Revelation 14:7; Revelation 15:4; Revelation 15:8; Revelation 16:9; Revelation 18:1; Revelation 18:7; Revelation 19:1; Revelation 19:7; Revelation 21:11; Revelation 21:23; Revelation 21:24; Revelation 21:26; Colossians 3:1-4; 1 Corinthians 6:19-20; 1 Peter 4:15-16; James 2:1-4; Numbers 14:9-10; Acts 3:13-14; Acts 7:1-3; Philippians 2:14-16
* **Associated Articles:** Exalt (ID: `26577@UWTranslationWords`); Honor (ID: `26704@UWTranslationWords`); Majesty (ID: `26847@UWTranslationWords`); Praise (ID: `26974@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Glory (ID: `keyterm:Glory`)

## Goat (id: 26645)

goat, goatskins, scapegoat, kids
================================

Definition:
-----------

A goat is a medium\-sized, four\-legged animal which is similar to a sheep and is raised primarily for its milk and meat. A baby goat is called a “kid.”

* Like sheep, goats were important animals of sacrifice, especially at Passover.
* Although goats and sheep can be very similar, these are some ways that they are different:

    + Goats have coarse hair; sheep have wool.
        + The tail of a goat stands up; the tail of a sheep hangs down.
        + Sheep usually like to stay with their herd, but goats are more independent and tend to wander away from their herd.
* In Bible times, goats were often the main source of milk in Israel.
* Goat skins were used for tent coverings and to make bags for holding wine.
* In both the Old and New Testaments, the goat was used as a symbol for unrighteous people, perhaps because of its tendency to wander away from the one taking care of it.
* The Israelites also used goats as symbolic sin bearers. When one goat was sacrificed, the priest would lay his hands on a second, live goat, and send it into the desert as a symbol that the animal was bearing the people’s sins.

(See also: flock, sacrifice, sheep, righteous, wine)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Exodus 12:3–4](https://ref.ly/Exod12:3-Exod12:4)
* [Genesis 30:32](https://ref.ly/Gen30:32)
* [Genesis 31:10](https://ref.ly/Gen31:10)
* [Genesis 37:31](https://ref.ly/Gen37:31)
* [Leviticus 3:12–14](https://ref.ly/Lev3:12-Lev3:14)
* [Matthew 25:33](https://ref.ly/Matt25:33)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0689, H1423, H1429, H3277, H3629, H5795, H5796, H6260, H6629, H6842, H7716, H8163, H8166, H8495, G01220, G20550, G20560, G51310

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 15:9; Genesis 27:9; Genesis 27:16; Genesis 30:32; Genesis 30:33; Genesis 30:35; Genesis 31:10; Genesis 31:12; Genesis 31:38; Genesis 32:14; Genesis 37:31; Genesis 38:17; Genesis 38:20; Genesis 38:23; Exodus 12:5; Exodus 23:19; Exodus 34:26; Ezra 6:17; Ezra 8:35; Proverbs 5:19; Proverbs 27:26; Proverbs 27:27; Proverbs 30:31; Matthew 25:32; Matthew 25:33; Luke 15:29; Hebrews 9:13; Hebrews 9:19; Hebrews 10:4; Exodus 12:3-4; Leviticus 3:12-14
* **Associated Articles:** Flock (ID: `26603@UWTranslationWords`); Righteous (ID: `27035@UWTranslationWords`); Sacrifice (ID: `27046@UWTranslationWords`); Sheep (ID: `27082@UWTranslationWords`); Wine (ID: `27205@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Goat (ID: `fauna:Goat`)

## God (id: 26646)

God
===

Definition:
-----------

In the Bible, the term “God” refers to the eternal being who created the universe out of nothing. God exists as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. God’s personal name is “Yahweh.”

* God has always existed; he existed before anything else existed, and he will continue to exist forever.
* He is the only true God and has authority over everything in the universe.
* God is perfectly righteous, infinitely wise, holy, sinless, just, merciful, and loving.
* He is a covenant\-keeping God, who always fulfills his promises.
* People were created to worship God and he is the only one they should worship.
* God revealed his name as “Yahweh,” which means “he is” or “I am” or “the One who (always) exists.”
* The Bible also teaches about false “gods,” which are nonliving idols that people wrongly worship.

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* Ways to translate “God” could include “Deity” or “Creator” or “Supreme Being” or “Supreme Creator” or “Infinite Sovereign Lord” or “Eternal Supreme Being.”
* Consider how God is referred to in a local or national language. There may also already be a word for “God” in the language being translated. If so, it is important to make sure that this word fits the characteristics of the one true God as described above.
* Many languages capitalize the first letter of the word for the one true God, to distinguish it from the word for a false god. Another way to make this distinction would be to use different terms for “God” and “god.” NOTE: In the biblical text, when a person who does not worship Yahweh speaks about Yahweh and uses the word “god,” it is acceptable to render the term without a capital letter in reference to Yahweh (see Jonah 1:6, 3:9\).
* The phrase “I will be their God and they will be my people” could also be translated as “I, God, will rule over these people and they will worship me.”

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: create, false god, God the Father, Holy Spirit, false god, Son of God, Yahweh)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 John 1:7](https://ref.ly/1John1:7)
* [1 Samuel 10:7–8](https://ref.ly/1Sam10:7-1Sam10:8)
* [1 Timothy 4:10](https://ref.ly/1Tim4:10)
* [Colossians 1:16](https://ref.ly/Col1:16)
* [Deuteronomy 29:14–16](https://ref.ly/Deut29:14-Deut29:16)
* [Ezra 3:1–2](https://ref.ly/Ezra3:1-Ezra3:2)
* [Genesis 1:2](https://ref.ly/Gen1:2)
* [Hosea 4:11–12](https://ref.ly/Hos4:11-Hos4:12)
* [Isaiah 36:6–7](https://ref.ly/Isa36:6-Isa36:7)
* [James 2:20](https://ref.ly/Jas2:20)
* [Jeremiah 5:5](https://ref.ly/Jer5:5)
* [John 1:3](https://ref.ly/John1:3)
* [Joshua 3:9–11](https://ref.ly/Josh3:9-Josh3:11)
* [Lamentations 3:43](https://ref.ly/Lam3:43)
* [Micah 4:5](https://ref.ly/Mic4:5)
* [Philippians 2:6](https://ref.ly/Phil2:6)
* [Proverbs 24:12](https://ref.ly/Prov24:12)
* [Psalms 47:9](https://ref.ly/Ps47:9)

Examples from the Bible stories:
--------------------------------

* **1:1** **God** created the universe and everything in it in six days.
* **1:15** **God** made man and woman in his own image.
* **5:3** “I am **God** Almighty. I will make a covenant with you.”
* **9:14** **God** said, “I AM WHO I AM. Tell them, ‘I AM has sent me to you.’ Also tell them, ‘I am Yahweh, the **God** of your ancestors Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. This is my name forever.’”
* **10:2** Through these plagues, **God** showed Pharaoh that he is more powerful than Pharaoh and all of Egypt’s gods.
* **16:1** The Israelites began to worship the Canaanite gods instead of Yahweh, the true **God**.
* **22:7** “You, my son, will be called the prophet of the **Most High God** who will prepare the people to receive the Messiah!”
* **24:9** There is only one **God**. But John heard **God** the Father speak, and saw Jesus the Son and the Holy Spirit when he baptized Jesus.
* **25:7** “Worship only the Lord your **God** and only serve him.”
* **28:1** “There is only one who is good, and that is **God**.”
* **49:9** But **God** loved everyone in the world so much that he gave his only Son so that whoever believes in Jesus will not be punished for his sins, but will live with **God** forever.
* **50:16** But some day **God** will create a new heaven and a new earth that will be perfect.

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0136, H0305, H0410, H0426, H0430, H0433, H2486, H2623, H3068, H3069, H3863, H4136, H6697, G01120, G05160, G09320, G09350, G10960, G11400, G20980, G21240, G21280, G21500, G21520, G21530, G22990, G23040, G23050, G23120, G23130, G23140, G23150, G23160, G23170, G23180, G23190, G23200, G33610, G37850, G41510, G52070, G53770, G54630, G55370, G55380

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 1:1; Genesis 1:2; Genesis 1:3; Genesis 1:4; Genesis 1:5; Genesis 1:6; Genesis 1:7; Genesis 1:8; Genesis 1:9; Genesis 1:10; Genesis 1:11; Genesis 1:12; Genesis 1:14; Genesis 1:16; Genesis 1:17; Genesis 1:18; Genesis 1:20; Genesis 1:21; Genesis 1:22; Genesis 1:24; Genesis 1:25; Genesis 1:26; Genesis 1:27; Genesis 1:28; Genesis 1:29; Genesis 1:31; Genesis 2:2; Genesis 2:3; Genesis 2:4; Genesis 2:5; Genesis 2:7; Genesis 2:8; Genesis 2:9; Genesis 2:15; Genesis 2:16; Genesis 2:18; Genesis 2:19; Genesis 2:21; Genesis 2:22; Genesis 3:1; Genesis 3:3; Genesis 3:5; Genesis 3:8; Genesis 3:9; Genesis 3:13; Genesis 3:14; Genesis 3:21; Genesis 3:22; Genesis 3:23; Genesis 4:25; Genesis 5:1; Genesis 5:22; Genesis 5:24; Genesis 6:2; Genesis 6:4; Genesis 6:9; Genesis 6:11; Genesis 6:12; Genesis 6:13; Genesis 6:22; Genesis 7:9; Genesis 7:16; Genesis 8:1; Genesis 8:15; Genesis 9:1; Genesis 9:6; Genesis 9:8; Genesis 9:12; Genesis 9:16; Genesis 9:17; Genesis 9:26; Genesis 9:27; Genesis 14:18; Genesis 14:19; Genesis 14:20; Genesis 14:22; Genesis 16:13; Genesis 17:1; Genesis 17:3; Genesis 17:7; Genesis 17:8; Genesis 17:9; Genesis 17:15; Genesis 17:18; Genesis 17:19; Genesis 17:22; Genesis 17:23; Genesis 19:29; Genesis 20:3; Genesis 20:6; Genesis 20:11; Genesis 20:13; Genesis 20:17; Genesis 21:2; Genesis 21:4; Genesis 21:6; Genesis 21:12; Genesis 21:17; Genesis 21:19; Genesis 21:20; Genesis 21:22; Genesis 21:23; Genesis 21:33; Genesis 22:1; Genesis 22:3; Genesis 22:8; Genesis 22:9; Genesis 22:12; Genesis 23:6; Genesis 24:3; Genesis 24:7; Genesis 24:12; Genesis 24:27; Genesis 24:42; Genesis 24:48; Genesis 25:11; Genesis 26:24; Genesis 27:20; Genesis 27:28; Genesis 28:3; Genesis 28:4; Genesis 28:12; Genesis 28:13; Genesis 28:17; Genesis 28:20; Genesis 28:21; Genesis 28:22; Genesis 30:2; Genesis 30:6; Genesis 30:8; Genesis 30:17; Genesis 30:18; Genesis 30:20; Genesis 30:22; Genesis 30:23; Genesis 31:5; Genesis 31:7; Genesis 31:9; Genesis 31:11; Genesis 31:13; Genesis 31:16; Genesis 31:24; Genesis 31:29; Genesis 31:42; Genesis 31:50; Genesis 31:53; Genesis 32:1; Genesis 32:2; Genesis 32:9; Genesis 32:28; Genesis 32:30; Genesis 33:5; Genesis 33:10; Genesis 33:11; Genesis 33:20; Genesis 35:1; Genesis 35:3; Genesis 35:5; Genesis 35:7; Genesis 35:9; Genesis 35:10; Genesis 35:11; Genesis 35:13; Genesis 35:15; Genesis 39:9; Genesis 40:8; Genesis 41:16; Genesis 41:25; Genesis 41:28; Genesis 41:32; Genesis 41:38; Genesis 41:39; Genesis 41:51; Genesis 41:52; Genesis 42:18; Genesis 42:28; Genesis 43:14; Genesis 43:23; Genesis 43:29; Genesis 44:16; Genesis 45:5; Genesis 45:7; Genesis 45:8; Genesis 45:9; Genesis 46:1; Genesis 46:2; Genesis 46:3; Genesis 48:3; Genesis 48:9; Genesis 48:11; Genesis 48:15; Genesis 48:20; Genesis 48:21; Genesis 49:25; Genesis 50:17; Genesis 50:19; Genesis 50:20; Genesis 50:24; Genesis 50:25; Exodus 1:17; Exodus 1:20; Exodus 1:21; Exodus 2:23; Exodus 2:24; Exodus 2:25; Exodus 3:1; Exodus 3:4; Exodus 3:6; Exodus 3:11; Exodus 3:12; Exodus 3:13; Exodus 3:14; Exodus 3:15; Exodus 3:16; Exodus 3:18; Exodus 4:5; Exodus 4:16; Exodus 4:20; Exodus 4:27; Exodus 5:1; Exodus 5:3; Exodus 5:8; Exodus 6:2; Exodus 6:3; Exodus 6:7; Exodus 7:1; Exodus 7:16; Exodus 8:10; Exodus 8:19; Exodus 8:25; Exodus 8:26; Exodus 8:27; Exodus 8:28; Exodus 9:1; Exodus 9:13; Exodus 9:28; Exodus 9:30; Exodus 10:3; Exodus 10:7; Exodus 10:8; Exodus 10:16; Exodus 10:17; Exodus 10:25; Exodus 10:26; Exodus 12:12; Exodus 13:17; Exodus 13:18; Exodus 13:19; Exodus 14:19; Exodus 15:2; Exodus 15:26; Exodus 16:12; Exodus 17:9; Exodus 18:1; Exodus 18:4; Exodus 18:5; Exodus 18:11; Exodus 18:12; Exodus 18:15; Exodus 18:16; Exodus 18:19; Exodus 18:21; Exodus 18:23; Exodus 19:3; Exodus 19:17; Exodus 19:19; Exodus 20:1; Exodus 20:2; Exodus 20:3; Exodus 20:5; Exodus 20:7; Exodus 20:10; Exodus 20:12; Exodus 20:19; Exodus 20:20; Exodus 20:21; Exodus 20:23; Exodus 21:6; Exodus 21:13; Exodus 22:8; Exodus 22:9; Exodus 22:20; Exodus 22:28; Exodus 23:13; Exodus 23:19; Exodus 23:24; Exodus 23:25; Exodus 23:32; Exodus 23:33; Exodus 24:10; Exodus 24:11; Exodus 29:45; Exodus 29:46; Exodus 31:3; Exodus 31:18; Exodus 32:1; Exodus 32:4; Exodus 32:8; Exodus 32:11; Exodus 32:16; Exodus 32:23; Exodus 32:27; Exodus 32:31; Exodus 34:6; Exodus 34:14; Exodus 34:15; Exodus 34:16; Exodus 34:17; Exodus 34:23; Exodus 34:24; Exodus 34:26; Exodus 35:31; Ruth 1:16; Ruth 2:12; Ezra 1:2; Ezra 1:3; Ezra 1:5; Ezra 3:2; Ezra 4:1; Ezra 4:2; Ezra 4:3; Ezra 5:1; Ezra 5:2; Ezra 5:5; Ezra 5:11; Ezra 5:12; Ezra 6:9; Ezra 6:10; Ezra 6:12; Ezra 6:14; Ezra 6:18; Ezra 6:21; Ezra 6:22; Ezra 7:6; Ezra 7:9; Ezra 7:12; Ezra 7:14; Ezra 7:15; Ezra 7:18; Ezra 7:19; Ezra 7:21; Ezra 7:23; Ezra 7:25; Ezra 7:26; Ezra 7:27; Ezra 7:28; Ezra 8:17; Ezra 8:18; Ezra 8:21; Ezra 8:22; Ezra 8:23; Ezra 8:28; Ezra 8:31; Ezra 8:35; Ezra 9:4; Ezra 9:5; Ezra 9:6; Ezra 9:8; Ezra 9:9; Ezra 9:10; Ezra 9:13; Ezra 9:15; Ezra 10:2; Ezra 10:3; Ezra 10:6; Ezra 10:11; Ezra 10:14; Nehemiah 1:4; Nehemiah 1:5; Nehemiah 2:4; Nehemiah 2:8; Nehemiah 2:12; Nehemiah 2:18; Nehemiah 2:20; Nehemiah 4:4; Nehemiah 4:9; Nehemiah 4:15; Nehemiah 4:20; Nehemiah 5:9; Nehemiah 5:13; Nehemiah 5:15; Nehemiah 5:19; Nehemiah 6:10; Nehemiah 6:12; Nehemiah 6:14; Nehemiah 6:16; Nehemiah 7:2; Nehemiah 7:5; Nehemiah 8:6; Nehemiah 8:8; Nehemiah 8:9; Nehemiah 8:16; Nehemiah 8:18; Nehemiah 9:3; Nehemiah 9:4; Nehemiah 9:5; Nehemiah 9:7; Nehemiah 9:17; Nehemiah 9:18; Nehemiah 9:31; Nehemiah 9:32; Nehemiah 10:28; Nehemiah 10:29; Nehemiah 10:32; Nehemiah 10:33; Nehemiah 10:34; Nehemiah 10:36; Nehemiah 10:37; Nehemiah 10:38; Nehemiah 10:39; Nehemiah 11:11; Nehemiah 11:16; Nehemiah 11:22; Nehemiah 12:24; Nehemiah 12:36; Nehemiah 12:40; Nehemiah 12:43; Nehemiah 12:45; Nehemiah 12:46; Nehemiah 13:1; Nehemiah 13:2; Nehemiah 13:4; Nehemiah 13:7; Nehemiah 13:9; Nehemiah 13:11; Nehemiah 13:14; Nehemiah 13:18; Nehemiah 13:22; Nehemiah 13:25; Nehemiah 13:26; Nehemiah 13:27; Nehemiah 13:29; Nehemiah 13:31; Job 1:1; Job 1:5; Job 1:6; Job 1:8; Job 1:9; Job 1:16; Job 1:22; Job 2:1; Job 2:3; Job 2:9; Job 2:10; Job 3:4; Job 3:23; Job 4:9; Job 5:8; Job 5:17; Job 6:4; Job 6:8; Job 6:9; Job 9:13; Job 10:2; Job 11:5; Job 11:6; Job 11:7; Job 12:6; Job 15:8; Job 16:20; Job 16:21; Job 19:6; Job 19:21; Job 19:26; Job 20:29; Job 21:9; Job 21:19; Job 22:12; Job 22:26; Job 27:3; Job 27:8; Job 27:10; Job 28:23; Job 29:2; Job 29:4; Job 31:2; Job 31:6; Job 32:2; Job 33:12; Job 33:26; Job 34:9; Job 35:10; Job 37:15; Job 37:22; Job 38:7; Job 39:17; Job 40:2; Psalms 47:9; Proverbs 2:5; Proverbs 2:17; Proverbs 3:4; Proverbs 24:12; Proverbs 25:2; Proverbs 30:5; Proverbs 30:9; Jeremiah 5:5; Lamentations 3:43; Jonah 1:6; Jonah 1:9; Jonah 2:1; Jonah 2:6; Jonah 3:5; Jonah 3:8; Jonah 3:9; Jonah 3:10; Jonah 4:2; Jonah 4:6; Jonah 4:7; Jonah 4:8; Jonah 4:9; Micah 4:5; Zephaniah 2:7; Zephaniah 2:9; Zephaniah 2:11; Zephaniah 3:2; Zephaniah 3:17; Haggai 1:12; Haggai 1:14; Matthew 1:23; Matthew 3:9; Matthew 4:3; Matthew 4:4; Matthew 4:6; Matthew 4:7; Matthew 4:10; Matthew 5:8; Matthew 5:9; Matthew 5:34; Matthew 6:24; Matthew 6:30; Matthew 9:8; Matthew 12:4; Matthew 15:3; Matthew 15:4; Matthew 15:31; Matthew 16:23; Matthew 19:6; Matthew 19:26; Matthew 22:16; Matthew 22:21; Matthew 22:29; Matthew 22:31; Matthew 22:32; Matthew 22:37; Matthew 23:22; Matthew 26:61; Matthew 26:63; Matthew 27:40; Matthew 27:43; Matthew 27:46; Mark 1:14; Mark 1:24; Mark 2:7; Mark 2:12; Mark 2:26; Mark 3:35; Mark 5:7; Mark 7:8; Mark 7:9; Mark 8:33; Mark 10:9; Mark 10:15; Mark 10:18; Mark 10:25; Mark 10:27; Mark 11:22; Mark 12:14; Mark 12:17; Mark 12:24; Mark 12:26; Mark 12:27; Mark 12:29; Mark 12:30; Mark 13:19; Mark 15:34; Luke 1:6; Luke 1:8; Luke 1:16; Luke 1:19; Luke 1:26; Luke 1:30; Luke 1:37; Luke 1:47; Luke 1:64; Luke 1:68; Luke 1:78; Luke 2:13; Luke 2:14; Luke 2:20; Luke 2:28; Luke 2:38; Luke 2:40; Luke 2:52; Luke 3:6; Luke 3:8; Luke 3:38; Luke 4:8; Luke 4:12; Luke 4:34; Luke 5:21; Luke 5:25; Luke 5:26; Luke 6:4; Luke 6:12; Luke 7:16; Luke 7:29; Luke 7:30; Luke 8:39; Luke 9:20; Luke 9:43; Luke 10:27; Luke 11:20; Luke 11:42; Luke 11:49; Luke 12:6; Luke 12:8; Luke 12:9; Luke 12:20; Luke 12:21; Luke 12:24; Luke 12:28; Luke 13:13; Luke 15:10; Luke 16:13; Luke 16:15; Luke 17:15; Luke 17:18; Luke 18:2; Luke 18:4; Luke 18:7; Luke 18:11; Luke 18:13; Luke 18:19; Luke 18:27; Luke 18:43; Luke 19:37; Luke 20:21; Luke 20:25; Luke 20:37; Luke 20:38; Luke 22:69; Luke 23:35; Luke 23:40; Luke 23:47; Luke 24:19; Luke 24:53; John 1:1; John 1:2; John 1:3; John 1:6; John 1:12; John 1:13; John 1:18; John 1:29; John 1:36; John 1:51; John 3:2; John 3:16; John 3:17; John 3:21; John 3:33; John 3:34; John 3:36; John 4:10; John 4:24; John 5:18; John 5:42; John 5:44; John 6:27; John 6:28; John 6:29; John 6:33; John 6:45; John 6:46; John 6:69; John 7:17; John 8:40; John 8:41; John 8:42; John 8:47; John 8:54; John 9:3; John 9:16; John 9:24; John 9:29; John 9:31; John 9:33; John 10:33; John 11:4; John 11:22; John 11:40; John 11:52; John 12:43; John 13:3; John 13:31; John 13:32; John 14:1; John 16:2; John 16:27; John 16:30; John 17:3; John 20:17; John 20:28; John 21:19; Acts 2:11; Acts 2:17; Acts 2:22; Acts 2:23; Acts 2:24; Acts 2:30; Acts 2:32; Acts 2:33; Acts 2:36; Acts 2:39; Acts 2:47; Acts 3:8; Acts 3:9; Acts 3:13; Acts 3:15; Acts 3:18; Acts 3:21; Acts 3:22; Acts 3:25; Acts 3:26; Acts 4:10; Acts 4:19; Acts 4:21; Acts 4:24; Acts 5:4; Acts 5:29; Acts 5:30; Acts 5:31; Acts 5:32; Acts 5:39; Acts 6:11; Acts 7:2; Acts 7:6; Acts 7:7; Acts 7:9; Acts 7:17; Acts 7:20; Acts 7:25; Acts 7:32; Acts 7:35; Acts 7:37; Acts 7:42; Acts 7:45; Acts 7:46; Acts 7:55; Acts 7:56; Acts 8:10; Acts 8:20; Acts 8:21; Acts 10:2; Acts 10:3; Acts 10:4; Acts 10:15; Acts 10:22; Acts 10:28; Acts 10:31; Acts 10:33; Acts 10:34; Acts 10:38; Acts 10:40; Acts 10:41; Acts 10:42; Acts 10:46; Acts 11:9; Acts 11:17; Acts 11:18; Acts 11:23; Acts 12:5; Acts 12:23; Acts 13:16; Acts 13:17; Acts 13:21; Acts 13:23; Acts 13:26; Acts 13:30; Acts 13:33; Acts 13:36; Acts 13:37; Acts 13:43; Acts 14:15; Acts 14:26; Acts 14:27; Acts 15:4; Acts 15:7; Acts 15:8; Acts 15:10; Acts 15:12; Acts 15:14; Acts 15:19; Acts 16:10; Acts 16:14; Acts 16:17; Acts 16:25; Acts 16:34; Acts 17:23; Acts 17:24; Acts 17:27; Acts 17:29; Acts 17:30; Acts 18:7; Acts 18:13; Acts 18:21; Acts 18:26; Acts 19:11; Acts 20:21; Acts 20:24; Acts 20:27; Acts 20:28; Acts 20:32; Acts 21:19; Acts 21:20; Acts 22:3; Acts 22:14; Acts 23:1; Acts 23:3; Acts 23:4; Acts 24:14; Acts 24:15; Acts 24:16; Acts 26:6; Acts 26:8; Acts 26:18; Acts 26:20; Acts 26:22; Acts 26:29; Acts 27:23; Acts 27:24; Acts 27:25; Acts 27:35; Acts 28:15; Acts 28:28; Romans 1:1; Romans 1:7; Romans 1:8; Romans 1:9; Romans 1:10; Romans 1:16; Romans 1:17; Romans 1:18; Romans 1:19; Romans 1:21; Romans 1:23; Romans 1:24; Romans 1:25; Romans 1:26; Romans 1:28; Romans 1:32; Romans 2:2; Romans 2:3; Romans 2:4; Romans 2:5; Romans 2:11; Romans 2:13; Romans 2:16; Romans 2:17; Romans 2:23; Romans 2:24; Romans 2:29; Romans 3:2; Romans 3:3; Romans 3:4; Romans 3:5; Romans 3:6; Romans 3:7; Romans 3:11; Romans 3:18; Romans 3:19; Romans 3:21; Romans 3:22; Romans 3:23; Romans 3:25; Romans 3:26; Romans 3:29; Romans 3:30; Romans 4:2; Romans 4:3; Romans 4:6; Romans 4:17; Romans 4:20; Romans 5:1; Romans 5:2; Romans 5:5; Romans 5:8; Romans 5:10; Romans 5:11; Romans 5:15; Romans 6:10; Romans 6:11; Romans 6:13; Romans 6:17; Romans 6:22; Romans 6:23; Romans 7:4; Romans 7:22; Romans 7:25; Romans 8:3; Romans 8:7; Romans 8:8; Romans 8:14; Romans 8:16; Romans 8:17; Romans 8:19; Romans 8:21; Romans 8:27; Romans 8:28; Romans 8:31; Romans 8:33; Romans 8:34; Romans 8:39; Romans 9:5; Romans 9:8; Romans 9:11; Romans 9:14; Romans 9:16; Romans 9:20; Romans 9:22; Romans 9:26; Romans 10:1; Romans 10:2; Romans 10:3; Romans 10:9; Romans 11:1; Romans 11:2; Romans 11:8; Romans 11:21; Romans 11:22; Romans 11:23; Romans 11:29; Romans 11:30; Romans 11:32; Romans 11:33; Romans 12:1; Romans 12:2; Romans 12:3; Romans 13:1; Romans 13:2; Romans 13:4; Romans 13:6; Romans 14:3; Romans 14:6; Romans 14:10; Romans 14:11; Romans 14:12; Romans 14:18; Romans 14:20; Romans 14:22; Romans 15:5; Romans 15:7; Romans 15:8; Romans 15:9; Romans 15:13; Romans 15:15; Romans 15:16; Romans 15:17; Romans 15:30; Romans 15:32; Romans 15:33; Romans 16:20; Romans 16:26; Romans 16:27; 1 Corinthians 1:1; 1 Corinthians 1:2; 1 Corinthians 1:4; 1 Corinthians 1:9; 1 Corinthians 1:18; 1 Corinthians 1:20; 1 Corinthians 1:21; 1 Corinthians 1:24; 1 Corinthians 1:25; 1 Corinthians 1:27; 1 Corinthians 1:28; 1 Corinthians 1:29; 1 Corinthians 1:30; 1 Corinthians 2:1; 1 Corinthians 2:5; 1 Corinthians 2:7; 1 Corinthians 2:9; 1 Corinthians 2:10; 1 Corinthians 2:11; 1 Corinthians 2:12; 1 Corinthians 3:6; 1 Corinthians 3:7; 1 Corinthians 3:9; 1 Corinthians 3:10; 1 Corinthians 3:16; 1 Corinthians 3:17; 1 Corinthians 3:19; 1 Corinthians 3:23; 1 Corinthians 4:1; 1 Corinthians 4:5; 1 Corinthians 4:9; 1 Corinthians 5:13; 1 Corinthians 6:13; 1 Corinthians 6:14; 1 Corinthians 6:19; 1 Corinthians 6:20; 1 Corinthians 7:7; 1 Corinthians 7:15; 1 Corinthians 7:17; 1 Corinthians 7:19; 1 Corinthians 7:24; 1 Corinthians 8:3; 1 Corinthians 8:4; 1 Corinthians 8:5; 1 Corinthians 8:8; 1 Corinthians 9:9; 1 Corinthians 9:21; 1 Corinthians 10:5; 1 Corinthians 10:13; 1 Corinthians 10:20; 1 Corinthians 10:31; 1 Corinthians 10:32; 1 Corinthians 11:3; 1 Corinthians 11:7; 1 Corinthians 11:12; 1 Corinthians 11:13; 1 Corinthians 11:16; 1 Corinthians 11:22; 1 Corinthians 12:6; 1 Corinthians 12:18; 1 Corinthians 12:24; 1 Corinthians 12:28; 1 Corinthians 14:2; 1 Corinthians 14:16; 1 Corinthians 14:18; 1 Corinthians 14:25; 1 Corinthians 14:28; 1 Corinthians 14:33; 1 Corinthians 15:9; 1 Corinthians 15:10; 1 Corinthians 15:15; 1 Corinthians 15:28; 1 Corinthians 15:34; 1 Corinthians 15:38; 1 Corinthians 15:57; 2 Corinthians 1:1; 2 Corinthians 1:3; 2 Corinthians 1:4; 2 Corinthians 1:9; 2 Corinthians 1:12; 2 Corinthians 1:18; 2 Corinthians 1:19; 2 Corinthians 1:20; 2 Corinthians 1:21; 2 Corinthians 1:23; 2 Corinthians 2:14; 2 Corinthians 2:15; 2 Corinthians 2:17; 2 Corinthians 3:4; 2 Corinthians 3:5; 2 Corinthians 4:2; 2 Corinthians 4:4; 2 Corinthians 4:6; 2 Corinthians 4:7; 2 Corinthians 4:15; 2 Corinthians 5:1; 2 Corinthians 5:5; 2 Corinthians 5:11; 2 Corinthians 5:13; 2 Corinthians 5:18; 2 Corinthians 5:19; 2 Corinthians 5:20; 2 Corinthians 5:21; 2 Corinthians 6:1; 2 Corinthians 6:4; 2 Corinthians 6:7; 2 Corinthians 6:16; 2 Corinthians 7:1; 2 Corinthians 7:6; 2 Corinthians 7:9; 2 Corinthians 7:10; 2 Corinthians 7:11; 2 Corinthians 7:12; 2 Corinthians 8:1; 2 Corinthians 8:5; 2 Corinthians 8:16; 2 Corinthians 9:7; 2 Corinthians 9:8; 2 Corinthians 9:11; 2 Corinthians 9:12; 2 Corinthians 9:13; 2 Corinthians 9:14; 2 Corinthians 9:15; 2 Corinthians 10:5; 2 Corinthians 10:13; 2 Corinthians 11:7; 2 Corinthians 11:11; 2 Corinthians 12:2; 2 Corinthians 12:3; 2 Corinthians 12:19; 2 Corinthians 12:21; 2 Corinthians 13:4; 2 Corinthians 13:7; 2 Corinthians 13:11; 2 Corinthians 13:13; Ephesians 1:1; Ephesians 1:17; Ephesians 2:4; Ephesians 2:8; Ephesians 2:10; Ephesians 2:16; Ephesians 2:19; Ephesians 2:22; Ephesians 3:2; Ephesians 3:7; Ephesians 3:9; Ephesians 3:10; Ephesians 3:19; Ephesians 4:18; Ephesians 4:24; Ephesians 4:32; Ephesians 5:1; Ephesians 5:2; Ephesians 5:5; Ephesians 5:6; Ephesians 6:6; Ephesians 6:11; Ephesians 6:13; Philippians 1:3; Philippians 1:8; Philippians 1:11; Philippians 1:28; Philippians 2:6; Philippians 2:9; Philippians 2:13; Philippians 2:15; Philippians 2:27; Philippians 3:9; Philippians 3:14; Philippians 3:15; Philippians 4:6; Philippians 4:7; Philippians 4:9; Philippians 4:18; Philippians 4:19; Colossians 1:1; Colossians 1:6; Colossians 1:10; Colossians 1:15; Colossians 1:16; Colossians 1:25; Colossians 1:27; Colossians 2:2; Colossians 2:9; Colossians 2:12; Colossians 2:19; Colossians 3:1; Colossians 3:3; Colossians 3:6; Colossians 3:12; Colossians 3:16; Colossians 4:3; Colossians 4:12; 1 Thessalonians 1:2; 1 Thessalonians 1:4; 1 Thessalonians 1:8; 1 Thessalonians 1:9; 1 Thessalonians 2:2; 1 Thessalonians 2:4; 1 Thessalonians 2:5; 1 Thessalonians 2:8; 1 Thessalonians 2:9; 1 Thessalonians 2:10; 1 Thessalonians 2:12; 1 Thessalonians 2:13; 1 Thessalonians 2:14; 1 Thessalonians 2:15; 1 Thessalonians 3:2; 1 Thessalonians 3:9; 1 Thessalonians 4:1; 1 Thessalonians 4:5; 1 Thessalonians 4:7; 1 Thessalonians 4:8; 1 Thessalonians 4:14; 1 Thessalonians 4:16; 1 Thessalonians 5:9; 1 Thessalonians 5:23; 2 Thessalonians 1:2; 2 Thessalonians 1:3; 2 Thessalonians 1:4; 2 Thessalonians 1:5; 2 Thessalonians 1:6; 2 Thessalonians 1:8; 2 Thessalonians 1:11; 2 Thessalonians 1:12; 2 Thessalonians 2:4; 2 Thessalonians 2:11; 2 Thessalonians 2:13; 2 Thessalonians 3:5; 1 Timothy 1:1; 1 Timothy 1:4; 1 Timothy 1:11; 1 Timothy 1:17; 1 Timothy 2:3; 1 Timothy 2:5; 1 Timothy 3:5; 1 Timothy 3:15; 1 Timothy 4:3; 1 Timothy 4:4; 1 Timothy 4:10; 1 Timothy 5:4; 1 Timothy 5:5; 1 Timothy 5:21; 1 Timothy 6:1; 1 Timothy 6:11; 1 Timothy 6:13; 1 Timothy 6:17; 2 Timothy 1:1; 2 Timothy 1:3; 2 Timothy 1:6; 2 Timothy 1:7; 2 Timothy 1:8; 2 Timothy 2:14; 2 Timothy 2:15; 2 Timothy 2:19; 2 Timothy 2:25; 2 Timothy 3:16; 2 Timothy 3:17; 2 Timothy 4:1; Titus 1:1; Titus 1:2; Titus 1:3; Titus 1:7; Titus 1:16; Titus 2:10; Titus 2:11; Titus 2:13; Titus 3:4; Titus 3:8; Philemon 1:4; Hebrews 1:1; Hebrews 1:6; Hebrews 1:8; Hebrews 1:9; Hebrews 2:4; Hebrews 2:9; Hebrews 2:13; Hebrews 2:17; Hebrews 3:4; Hebrews 3:12; Hebrews 4:4; Hebrews 4:9; Hebrews 4:10; Hebrews 5:1; Hebrews 5:4; Hebrews 5:10; Hebrews 5:12; Hebrews 6:1; Hebrews 6:3; Hebrews 6:7; Hebrews 6:10; Hebrews 6:13; Hebrews 6:17; Hebrews 6:18; Hebrews 7:1; Hebrews 7:19; Hebrews 7:25; Hebrews 8:10; Hebrews 9:14; Hebrews 9:20; Hebrews 9:24; Hebrews 10:7; Hebrews 10:12; Hebrews 10:21; Hebrews 10:31; Hebrews 10:36; Hebrews 11:3; Hebrews 11:4; Hebrews 11:5; Hebrews 11:6; Hebrews 11:10; Hebrews 11:16; Hebrews 11:19; Hebrews 11:25; Hebrews 11:40; Hebrews 12:2; Hebrews 12:7; Hebrews 12:15; Hebrews 12:22; Hebrews 12:23; Hebrews 12:28; Hebrews 12:29; Hebrews 13:4; Hebrews 13:15; Hebrews 13:16; Hebrews 13:20; James 1:1; James 1:5; James 1:13; James 1:20; James 2:5; James 2:19; James 2:20; James 2:23; James 3:9; James 4:4; James 4:6; James 4:7; James 4:8; 1 Peter 1:5; 1 Peter 1:21; 1 Peter 1:23; 1 Peter 2:4; 1 Peter 2:5; 1 Peter 2:10; 1 Peter 2:12; 1 Peter 2:15; 1 Peter 2:16; 1 Peter 2:17; 1 Peter 2:19; 1 Peter 2:20; 1 Peter 3:4; 1 Peter 3:5; 1 Peter 3:17; 1 Peter 3:18; 1 Peter 3:20; 1 Peter 3:21; 1 Peter 3:22; 1 Peter 4:2; 1 Peter 4:6; 1 Peter 4:10; 1 Peter 4:11; 1 Peter 4:14; 1 Peter 4:16; 1 Peter 4:17; 1 Peter 4:19; 1 Peter 5:2; 1 Peter 5:5; 1 Peter 5:6; 1 Peter 5:10; 1 Peter 5:12; 2 Peter 1:1; 2 Peter 1:2; 2 Peter 1:21; 2 Peter 2:4; 2 Peter 3:5; 2 Peter 3:12; 1 John 1:5; 1 John 1:7; 1 John 2:5; 1 John 2:17; 1 John 3:1; 1 John 3:2; 1 John 3:9; 1 John 3:10; 1 John 3:17; 1 John 3:20; 1 John 3:21; 1 John 4:1; 1 John 4:2; 1 John 4:3; 1 John 4:4; 1 John 4:6; 1 John 4:7; 1 John 4:8; 1 John 4:9; 1 John 4:10; 1 John 4:11; 1 John 4:12; 1 John 4:15; 1 John 4:16; 1 John 4:20; 1 John 4:21; 1 John 5:1; 1 John 5:2; 1 John 5:3; 1 John 5:4; 1 John 5:9; 1 John 5:10; 1 John 5:11; 1 John 5:18; 1 John 5:19; 1 John 5:20; 2 John 1:9; 3 John 1:6; 3 John 1:11; Jude 1:4; Jude 1:21; Jude 1:25; Revelation 1:1; Revelation 1:8; Revelation 2:7; Revelation 3:1; Revelation 3:2; Revelation 3:12; Revelation 3:14; Revelation 4:5; Revelation 4:8; Revelation 4:11; Revelation 5:6; Revelation 5:9; Revelation 5:10; Revelation 7:2; Revelation 7:3; Revelation 7:10; Revelation 7:11; Revelation 7:12; Revelation 7:15; Revelation 7:17; Revelation 8:2; Revelation 8:4; Revelation 9:4; Revelation 9:13; Revelation 10:7; Revelation 11:1; Revelation 11:11; Revelation 11:13; Revelation 11:16; Revelation 11:17; Revelation 11:19; Revelation 12:5; Revelation 12:6; Revelation 12:10; Revelation 12:17; Revelation 13:6; Revelation 14:4; Revelation 14:7; Revelation 14:10; Revelation 14:12; Revelation 14:19; Revelation 15:1; Revelation 15:2; Revelation 15:3; Revelation 15:7; Revelation 15:8; Revelation 16:1; Revelation 16:7; Revelation 16:9; Revelation 16:11; Revelation 16:14; Revelation 16:19; Revelation 16:21; Revelation 17:17; Revelation 18:5; Revelation 18:8; Revelation 18:20; Revelation 19:1; Revelation 19:4; Revelation 19:5; Revelation 19:6; Revelation 19:9; Revelation 19:10; Revelation 19:15; Revelation 19:17; Revelation 20:6; Revelation 21:2; Revelation 21:3; Revelation 21:7; Revelation 21:10; Revelation 21:11; Revelation 21:22; Revelation 21:23; Revelation 22:1; Revelation 22:3; Revelation 22:5; Revelation 22:6; Revelation 22:9; Revelation 22:18; Revelation 22:19; Joshua 3:9-11; 1 Samuel 10:7-8; Deuteronomy 29:14-16; Ezra 3:1-2; Hosea 4:11-12; Isaiah 36:6-7
* **Associated Articles:** Creation (ID: `26482@UWTranslationWords`); False God (ID: `26586@UWTranslationWords`); God the Father (ID: `26648@UWTranslationWords`); Holy Spirit (ID: `26702@UWTranslationWords`); Son of God (ID: `27108@UWTranslationWords`); Yahweh (ID: `27218@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** LORD (ID: `deity:Lord`)

## God the Father (id: 26648)

God the Father, heavenly Father, Father
=======================================

Facts:
------

The terms “God the Father” and “heavenly Father” refer to Yahweh, the one true God. Another term with the same meaning is “Father,” used most often when Jesus was referring to him.

* God exists as God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit. Each one is fully God, and yet they are only one God. This is a mystery that mere humans cannot fully understand.
* God the Father sent God the Son (Jesus) into the world and he sends the Holy Spirit to his people.
* Anyone who believes in God the Son becomes a child of God the Father, and God the Holy Spirit comes to live in that person. This is another mystery that human beings cannot fully understand.

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* In translating the phrase “God the Father,” it is best to translate “Father” with the same word that the language naturally uses to refer to a human father.
* The term “heavenly Father” could be translated by “Father who lives in heaven” or “Father God who lives in heaven” or “God our Father from heaven.”
* Usually “Father” is capitalized when it, refers to God.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: ancestor, God, heaven, Holy Spirit, Jesus, Son of God)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Corinthians 8:4–6](https://ref.ly/1Cor8:4-1Cor8:6)
* [1 John 2:1](https://ref.ly/1John2:1)
* [1 John 2:23](https://ref.ly/1John2:23)
* [1 John 3:1](https://ref.ly/1John3:1)
* [Colossians 1:1–3](https://ref.ly/Col1:1-Col1:3)
* [Ephesians 5:18–21](https://ref.ly/Eph5:18-Eph5:21)
* [Luke 10:22](https://ref.ly/Luke10:22)
* [Matthew 5:16](https://ref.ly/Matt5:16)
* [Matthew 23:9](https://ref.ly/Matt23:9)

Examples from the Bible stories:
--------------------------------

* **24:9** There is only one God. But John heard **God the Father** speak, and saw Jesus the Son and the Holy Spirit when he baptized Jesus.
* **29:9** Then Jesus said, “This is what my **heavenly Father** will do to every one of you if you do not forgive your brother from your heart.”
* **37:9** Then Jesus looked up to heaven and said, “**Father**, thank you for hearing me.”
* **40:7** Then Jesus cried out, “It is finished! **Father**, I give my spirit into your hands.”
* **42:10** “So go, make disciples of all people groups by baptizing them in the name of **the Father**, the Son, and the Holy Spirit and by teaching them to obey everything I have commanded you.”
* **43:8** “Jesus is now exalted to the right hand of **God the Father**.”
* **50:10** “Then the righteous ones will shine like the sun in the kingdom of **God their Father**.”

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0001, H0002, G39620

* **Associated Passages:** Matthew 5:16; Matthew 5:45; Matthew 5:48; Matthew 6:1; Matthew 6:4; Matthew 6:6; Matthew 6:8; Matthew 6:9; Matthew 6:14; Matthew 6:15; Matthew 6:18; Matthew 6:26; Matthew 6:32; Matthew 7:11; Matthew 7:21; Matthew 10:20; Matthew 10:29; Matthew 10:32; Matthew 10:33; Matthew 11:25; Matthew 11:26; Matthew 11:27; Matthew 12:50; Matthew 13:43; Matthew 15:13; Matthew 16:17; Matthew 16:27; Matthew 18:10; Matthew 18:14; Matthew 18:19; Matthew 18:35; Matthew 20:23; Matthew 23:9; Matthew 24:36; Matthew 25:34; Matthew 26:29; Matthew 26:39; Matthew 26:53; Matthew 28:19; Mark 8:38; Mark 11:25; Mark 13:32; Mark 14:36; Luke 1:32; Luke 2:49; Luke 6:36; Luke 9:26; Luke 10:21; Luke 10:22; Luke 11:2; Luke 11:13; Luke 12:30; Luke 12:32; Luke 22:29; Luke 23:46; Luke 24:49; John 1:14; John 1:18; John 2:16; John 3:35; John 4:21; John 4:23; John 5:17; John 5:18; John 5:19; John 5:20; John 5:21; John 5:22; John 5:23; John 5:26; John 5:36; John 5:37; John 5:43; John 5:45; John 6:27; John 6:32; John 6:37; John 6:40; John 6:44; John 6:45; John 6:46; John 6:57; John 6:65; John 8:16; John 8:18; John 8:19; John 8:27; John 8:28; John 8:38; John 8:41; John 8:42; John 8:49; John 8:54; John 10:15; John 10:17; John 10:18; John 10:25; John 10:29; John 10:30; John 10:32; John 10:36; John 10:37; John 10:38; John 11:41; John 12:26; John 12:27; John 12:28; John 12:49; John 12:50; John 13:1; John 13:3; John 14:2; John 14:6; John 14:7; John 14:8; John 14:9; John 14:10; John 14:11; John 14:12; John 14:13; John 14:16; John 14:20; John 14:21; John 14:23; John 14:24; John 14:26; John 14:28; John 14:31; John 15:1; John 15:8; John 15:9; John 15:10; John 15:15; John 15:16; John 15:23; John 15:24; John 15:26; John 16:3; John 16:10; John 16:15; John 16:17; John 16:23; John 16:25; John 16:26; John 16:27; John 16:28; John 16:32; John 17:1; John 17:5; John 17:11; John 17:21; John 17:24; John 17:25; John 18:11; John 20:17; John 20:21; Acts 1:4; Acts 1:7; Acts 2:33; Acts 3:13; Romans 1:7; Romans 6:4; Romans 8:15; Romans 15:6; 1 Corinthians 1:3; 1 Corinthians 8:6; 1 Corinthians 15:24; 2 Corinthians 1:2; 2 Corinthians 1:3; 2 Corinthians 6:18; 2 Corinthians 11:31; Ephesians 1:2; Ephesians 1:3; Ephesians 1:17; Ephesians 2:18; Ephesians 3:14; Ephesians 4:6; Ephesians 5:20; Ephesians 6:23; Philippians 1:2; Philippians 2:11; Philippians 4:20; Colossians 1:2; Colossians 1:3; Colossians 1:12; Colossians 3:17; 1 Thessalonians 1:1; 1 Thessalonians 1:3; 1 Thessalonians 3:11; 1 Thessalonians 3:13; 2 Thessalonians 1:1; 2 Thessalonians 1:2; 2 Thessalonians 2:16; 1 Timothy 1:2; 2 Timothy 1:2; Titus 1:4; Philemon 1:3; Hebrews 1:5; Hebrews 12:9; James 1:17; James 1:27; James 3:9; 1 Peter 1:2; 1 Peter 1:3; 1 Peter 1:17; 2 Peter 1:17; 1 John 1:2; 1 John 1:3; 1 John 2:1; 1 John 2:14; 1 John 2:15; 1 John 2:16; 1 John 2:22; 1 John 2:23; 1 John 2:24; 1 John 3:1; 1 John 4:14; 2 John 1:3; 2 John 1:4; 2 John 1:9; Jude 1:1; Revelation 1:6; Revelation 2:28; Revelation 3:5; Revelation 3:21; Revelation 14:1; 1 Corinthians 8:4-6; Colossians 1:1-3; Ephesians 5:18-21
* **Associated Articles:** God (ID: `26646@UWTranslationWords`); Heaven (ID: `26683@UWTranslationWords`); Holy Spirit (ID: `26702@UWTranslationWords`); Jesus (ID: `26758@UWTranslationWords`); Son of God (ID: `27108@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** LORD (ID: `deity:Lord`)

## Godly (id: 26647)

godly, godliness, ungodly, godless, ungodliness, godlessness
============================================================

Definition:
-----------

The term “godly” is used to describe a person who acts in a way that honors God and shows what God is like. “Godliness” is the character quality of honoring God by doing his will.

* A person who has godly character will show the fruits of the Holy Spirit, such as love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, and self control.
* The quality of godliness shows that a person has the Holy Spirit and is obeying him.

The terms “ungodly” and “godless” describe people who are in rebellion against God. Living in an evil way, without thought of God, is called “ungodliness” or “godlessness.”

* The meanings of these words are very similar. However, “godless” and “godlessness” may describe a more extreme condition in which people or nations do not even acknowledge God or his right to rule them.
* God pronounces judgment and wrath on ungodly people, on everyone who rejects him and his ways.

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* The phrase “the godly” could be translated as “godly people” or “people who obey God.” (See: nominaladj)
* The adjective “godly” could be translated as “obedient to God” or “righteous” or “pleasing to God.”
* The phrase “in a godly manner” could be translated as “in a way that obeys God” or “with actions and words that please God.”
* Ways to translate “godliness” could include “acting in a way that pleases God” or “obeying God” or “living in a righteous manner.”
* Depending on the context, the term “ungodly” could be translated as “displeasing to God” or “immoral” or “disobeying God.”
* The terms “godless” and “godlessness” literally mean that the people are “without God” or “having no thought of God” or “acting in a way that does not acknowledge God.”
* Other ways to translate “ungodliness” or “godlessness” could be “wickedness” or “evil” or “rebellion against God”.

(See also evil, honor, obey, righteous)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Job 27:10](https://ref.ly/Job27:10)
* [Proverbs 11:9](https://ref.ly/Prov11:9)
* [Acts 3:12](https://ref.ly/Acts3:12)
* [1 Timothy 1:9–11](https://ref.ly/1Tim1:9-1Tim1:11)
* [1 Timothy 4:7](https://ref.ly/1Tim4:7)
* [2 Timothy 3:12](https://ref.ly/2Tim3:12)
* [Hebrews 12:14–17](https://ref.ly/Heb12:14-Heb12:17)
* [Hebrews 11:7](https://ref.ly/Heb11:7)
* [1 Peter 4:18](https://ref.ly/1Pet4:18)
* [Jude 1:16](https://ref.ly/Jude1:16)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0430, H1100, H2623, H5760, H7563, G05160, G07630, G07640, G07650, G21240, G21500, G21520, G21530, G23160, G23170

* **Associated Passages:** Job 27:10; Proverbs 11:9; Acts 3:12; Romans 1:18; Romans 4:5; Romans 5:6; Romans 11:26; 2 Corinthians 11:2; 1 Timothy 1:9; 1 Timothy 2:2; 1 Timothy 2:10; 1 Timothy 3:16; 1 Timothy 4:7; 1 Timothy 4:8; 1 Timothy 6:3; 1 Timothy 6:5; 1 Timothy 6:6; 1 Timothy 6:11; 2 Timothy 2:16; 2 Timothy 3:5; 2 Timothy 3:12; Titus 1:1; Titus 2:12; Hebrews 11:7; 1 Peter 4:18; 2 Peter 1:3; 2 Peter 1:6; 2 Peter 1:7; 2 Peter 2:5; 2 Peter 2:6; 2 Peter 2:9; 2 Peter 3:7; 2 Peter 3:11; Jude 1:4; Jude 1:15; Jude 1:16; Jude 1:18; Hebrews 12:14-17; 1 Timothy 1:9-11
* **Associated Articles:** Evil (ID: `26576@UWTranslationWords`); Honor (ID: `26704@UWTranslationWords`); Righteous (ID: `27035@UWTranslationWords`)


## Gold (id: 26649)

gold, golden
============

Definition:
-----------

Gold is a yellow, high quality metal that was used for making jewelry and religious objects. It was the most valuable metal in ancient times.

* In Bible times, many different kinds of objects were made out of solid gold or were covered with a thin layer of gold.
* These objects included earrings and other jewelry, and idols, altars, and other objects used in the tabernacle or temple, such as the ark of the covenant.
* In Old Testament times, gold was used as a means of exchange in buying and selling. It was weighed on a scale to determine its value.
* Later on, gold and other metals such as silver were used to make coins to use in buying and selling
* When referring to something that is not solid gold, but only has a thin covering of gold, the term “golden” or “gold\-covered” or “gold\-overlaid” could also be used.
* Sometimes an object is described as “gold\-colored,” which means it has the yellow color of gold, but may not actually be made of gold.

(See also: altar, ark of the covenant, false god, silver, tabernacle, temple)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Peter 1:7](https://ref.ly/1Pet1:7)
* [1 Timothy 2:8–10](https://ref.ly/1Tim2:8-1Tim2:10)
* [2 Chronicles 1:15](https://ref.ly/2Chr1:15)
* [Acts 3:6](https://ref.ly/Acts3:6)
* [Daniel 2:32](https://ref.ly/Dan2:32)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1220, H1722, H2091, H2742, H3800, H5458, H6884, H6885, G55520, G55530, G55540, G55570

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 2:11; Genesis 2:12; Genesis 13:2; Genesis 24:22; Genesis 24:35; Genesis 24:53; Genesis 41:42; Genesis 44:8; Exodus 3:22; Exodus 11:2; Exodus 12:35; Exodus 20:23; Exodus 25:3; Exodus 25:11; Exodus 25:12; Exodus 25:13; Exodus 25:17; Exodus 25:18; Exodus 25:24; Exodus 25:25; Exodus 25:26; Exodus 25:28; Exodus 25:29; Exodus 25:31; Exodus 25:36; Exodus 25:38; Exodus 25:39; Exodus 26:6; Exodus 26:29; Exodus 26:32; Exodus 26:37; Exodus 28:5; Exodus 28:6; Exodus 28:8; Exodus 28:11; Exodus 28:13; Exodus 28:14; Exodus 28:15; Exodus 28:20; Exodus 28:22; Exodus 28:23; Exodus 28:24; Exodus 28:26; Exodus 28:27; Exodus 28:33; Exodus 28:34; Exodus 28:36; Exodus 30:3; Exodus 30:4; Exodus 30:5; Exodus 31:4; Exodus 32:2; Exodus 32:3; Exodus 32:24; Exodus 32:31; Exodus 35:5; Exodus 35:22; Exodus 35:32; Exodus 36:13; Exodus 36:34; Exodus 36:36; Exodus 36:38; Exodus 37:2; Exodus 37:3; Exodus 37:4; Exodus 37:6; Exodus 37:7; Exodus 37:11; Exodus 37:12; Exodus 37:13; Exodus 37:15; Exodus 37:16; Exodus 37:17; Exodus 37:22; Exodus 37:23; Exodus 37:24; Exodus 37:26; Exodus 37:27; Exodus 37:28; Exodus 38:24; Exodus 39:2; Exodus 39:3; Exodus 39:5; Exodus 39:6; Exodus 39:8; Exodus 39:13; Exodus 39:15; Exodus 39:16; Exodus 39:17; Exodus 39:19; Exodus 39:20; Exodus 39:25; Exodus 39:30; Exodus 39:38; Exodus 40:5; Exodus 40:26; 2 Chronicles 1:15; Ezra 1:4; Ezra 1:6; Ezra 1:9; Ezra 1:10; Ezra 1:11; Ezra 2:69; Ezra 5:14; Ezra 6:5; Ezra 7:15; Ezra 7:16; Ezra 7:18; Ezra 8:25; Ezra 8:26; Ezra 8:27; Ezra 8:28; Ezra 8:30; Ezra 8:33; Nehemiah 7:70; Nehemiah 7:71; Nehemiah 7:72; Job 3:15; Job 23:10; Job 28:1; Job 28:6; Job 28:17; Job 31:24; Job 37:22; Job 42:11; Proverbs 3:14; Proverbs 8:10; Proverbs 8:19; Proverbs 11:22; Proverbs 16:16; Proverbs 17:3; Proverbs 20:15; Proverbs 22:1; Proverbs 25:11; Proverbs 25:12; Proverbs 27:21; Song of Songs 1:11; Song of Songs 3:10; Song of Songs 5:14; Daniel 2:32; Zephaniah 1:18; Haggai 2:8; Matthew 2:11; Matthew 10:9; Matthew 23:16; Matthew 23:17; Acts 3:6; Acts 17:29; Acts 20:33; 1 Corinthians 3:12; 1 Timothy 2:9; 2 Timothy 2:20; Hebrews 9:4; James 2:2; James 5:3; 1 Peter 1:7; 1 Peter 1:18; 1 Peter 3:3; Revelation 1:12; Revelation 1:13; Revelation 1:20; Revelation 2:1; Revelation 3:18; Revelation 4:4; Revelation 5:8; Revelation 8:3; Revelation 9:7; Revelation 9:13; Revelation 9:20; Revelation 14:14; Revelation 15:6; Revelation 15:7; Revelation 17:4; Revelation 18:12; Revelation 18:16; Revelation 21:15; Revelation 21:18; Revelation 21:21; 1 Timothy 2:8-10
* **Associated Articles:** Altar (ID: `26305@UWTranslationWords`); Ark of the Covenant (ID: `26333@UWTranslationWords`); False God (ID: `26586@UWTranslationWords`); Silver (ID: `27095@UWTranslationWords`); Tabernacle (ID: `27136@UWTranslationWords`); Temple (ID: `27142@UWTranslationWords`)


## Golgotha (id: 26650)

Golgotha
========

Facts:
------

“Golgotha” was the name of the place where Jesus was crucified. Its name comes from an Aramaic word that means “Skull” or “Place of the Skull.”

* Golgotha was located outside the city walls of Jerusalem, somewhere nearby. It was perhaps located on a slope of the Mount of Olives.
* In some older English versions of the Bible, Golgotha is translated as “Calvary,” which comes from the Latin word for “skull.”
* Many Bible versions use a word that looks or sounds similar to “Golgotha,” since its meaning is already explained in the Bible text.

(Translation Suggestion: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Aram, Mount of Olives)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [John 19:17](https://ref.ly/John19:17)
* [Mark 15:22](https://ref.ly/Mark15:22)
* [Matthew 27:33](https://ref.ly/Matt27:33)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: G11150

* **Associated Passages:** Matthew 27:33; Mark 15:22; John 19:17
* **Associated Articles:** Aram (ID: `26329@UWTranslationWords`); Mount of Olives (ID: `26892@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Golgotha (ID: `place:Golgotha`)

## Goliath (id: 26651)

Goliath
=======

Facts:
------

Goliath was a very tall and very large soldier in the army of the Philistines who was killed by David.

* Goliath was between two and three meters tall. He is often referred to as a giant because of his great size.
* Although Goliath had better weapons and was much bigger than David, God gave David the strength and ability to defeat Goliath.
* The Israelites were declared victorious over the Philistines as a result of David’s victory over Goliath.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: David, Philistines)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Chronicles 20:4–5](https://ref.ly/1Chr20:4-1Chr20:5)
* [1 Samuel 17:4–5](https://ref.ly/1Sam17:4-1Sam17:5)
* [1 Samuel 21:8–9](https://ref.ly/1Sam21:8-1Sam21:9)
* [1 Samuel 22:9–10](https://ref.ly/1Sam22:9-1Sam22:10)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1555

* **Associated Passages:** 1 Samuel 22:9-10; 1 Chronicles 20:4-5; 1 Samuel 17:4-5; 1 Samuel 21:8-9
* **Associated Articles:** David (ID: `26503@UWTranslationWords`); Philistines (ID: `26958@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Goliath (ID: `person:Goliath`)

## Gomorrah (id: 26652)

Gomorrah
========

Facts:
------

Gomorrah was a city located in a fertile valley near Sodom, where Abraham’s nephew Lot chose to live.

* The exact location of Gomorrah and Sodom is unknown, but there are indications that they may have been located directly south of the Salt Sea, near the Valley of Siddim.
* There were many kings at war in the region where Sodom and Gomorrah were located.
* When Lot’s family was captured in a conflict between Sodom and other cities, Abraham and his men rescued them.
* Not long after that, Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed by God because of the wickedness of the people who lived there.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Abraham, Babylon, Lot, Salt Sea, Sodom)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [2 Peter 2:6](https://ref.ly/2Pet2:6)
* [Genesis 10:19](https://ref.ly/Gen10:19)
* [Genesis 14:1–2](https://ref.ly/Gen14:1-Gen14:2)
* [Genesis 18:21](https://ref.ly/Gen18:21)
* [Isaiah 1:9](https://ref.ly/Isa1:9)
* [Matthew 10:15](https://ref.ly/Matt10:15)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H6017

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 10:19; Genesis 13:10; Genesis 14:2; Genesis 14:8; Genesis 14:10; Genesis 14:11; Genesis 18:20; Genesis 18:21; Genesis 19:24; Genesis 19:28; Isaiah 1:9; Zephaniah 2:9; Matthew 10:15; Romans 9:29; 2 Peter 2:6; Jude 1:7; Genesis 14:1-2
* **Associated Articles:** Abraham (ID: `26282@UWTranslationWords`); Babylon (ID: `26358@UWTranslationWords`); Lot (ID: `26834@UWTranslationWords`); Saltsea (ID: `27049@UWTranslationWords`); Sodom (ID: `27106@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Gomorrah (ID: `place:Gomorrah`)

## Good (id: 26653)

good, right, pleasant, better, best
===================================

Definition:
-----------

The term “good” generally refers to a positive evaulation of the quality of something or someone, often in a moral or emotional sense. However, the term conveys various nuances throughout the Bible depending on the context.

* Something that is “good” could be emotionally pleasant, morally right, excellent, helpful, suitable, or profitable.
* In the Bible, the general meaning of “good” is often contrasted with “evil.”

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* The general term for “good” in the target language should be used wherever this general meaning is accurate and natural, especially in contexts where it is contrasted to evil.
* Depending on the context, other ways to translate this term could include “kind” or “excellent” or “pleasing to God” or “righteous” or “morally upright” or “profitable.”
* “Good land” could be translated as “fertile land” or “productive land”; a “good crop” could be translated as a “plentiful harvest” or “large amount of crops.”
* The phrase “do good to” means to do something that benefits others and could be translated as “be kind to” or “help” or “benefit” someone or “cause someone to prosper.”
* To “do good on the Sabbath” means to “do things that help others on the Sabbath.”
* Depending on the context, ways to translate the term “goodness” could include “blessing” or “kindness” or “moral perfection” or “righteousness” or “purity.”

(See also: righteous, prosper, evil)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Galatians 5:22–24](https://ref.ly/Gal5:22-Gal5:24)
* [Genesis 1:12](https://ref.ly/Gen1:12)
* [Genesis 2:9](https://ref.ly/Gen2:9)
* [Genesis 2:17](https://ref.ly/Gen2:17)
* [James 3:13](https://ref.ly/Jas3:13)
* [Romans 2:4](https://ref.ly/Rom2:4)

Examples from the Bible stories:
--------------------------------

* **1:4** God saw that what he had created was **good**.
* **1:11** God planted the tree of the knowledge of **good** and evil.
* **1:12** Then God said, “It is not **good** for man to be alone.”
* **2:4** “God just knows that as soon as you eat it, you will be like God and will understand **good** and evil like he does.”
* **8:12** “You tried to do evil when you sold me as a slave, but God used the evil for **good**!”
* **14:15** Joshua was a **good** leader because he trusted and obeyed God.
* **18:13** Some of these kings were **good** men who ruled justly and worshiped God.
* **28:1** “**Good** teacher, what must I do to have eternal life?” Jesus said to him, “Why do you call me ‘**good**?’ There is only one who is **good**, and that is God.”

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0117, H0145, H0155, H0202, H0239, H0410, H1580, H1926, H1935, H2532, H2617, H2623, H2869, H2895, H2896, H2898, H3190, H3191, H3276, H3474, H3788, H3966, H4261, H4399, H5232, H5750, H6287, H6643, H6743, H7075, H7368, H7399, H7443, H7999, H8231, H8232, H8233, H8389, H8458, G00140, G00150, G00180, G00190, G05150, G07440, G08650, G09790, G13800, G20950, G20970, G21060, G21070, G21080, G21090, G21140, G21150, G21330, G21400, G21620, G21630, G21740, G22930, G25650, G25670, G25700, G25730, G28870, G29860, G31400, G36170, G37760, G41470, G46320, G46740, G48510, G52230, G52240, G53580, G55420, G55430, G55440

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 1:4; Genesis 1:10; Genesis 1:12; Genesis 1:18; Genesis 1:21; Genesis 1:25; Genesis 1:31; Genesis 2:9; Genesis 2:12; Genesis 2:17; Genesis 2:18; Genesis 3:5; Genesis 3:6; Genesis 3:22; Genesis 4:7; Genesis 6:2; Genesis 12:16; Genesis 15:15; Genesis 16:6; Genesis 18:7; Genesis 20:15; Genesis 24:10; Genesis 24:16; Genesis 24:50; Genesis 25:8; Genesis 26:7; Genesis 26:29; Genesis 27:9; Genesis 29:19; Genesis 30:20; Genesis 31:24; Genesis 31:29; Genesis 32:9; Genesis 32:12; Genesis 34:18; Genesis 40:14; Genesis 40:16; Genesis 41:5; Genesis 41:22; Genesis 41:24; Genesis 41:26; Genesis 41:35; Genesis 41:37; Genesis 44:4; Genesis 45:16; Genesis 45:18; Genesis 45:20; Genesis 45:23; Genesis 47:6; Genesis 47:11; Genesis 49:15; Genesis 50:20; Exodus 1:20; Exodus 2:2; Exodus 3:8; Exodus 14:12; Exodus 18:9; Exodus 18:17; Exodus 33:19; Ruth 2:22; Ruth 3:13; Ruth 4:15; Ezra 3:11; Ezra 7:9; Ezra 7:18; Ezra 8:18; Ezra 8:22; Ezra 8:27; Ezra 9:12; Nehemiah 2:5; Nehemiah 2:6; Nehemiah 2:7; Nehemiah 2:8; Nehemiah 2:10; Nehemiah 2:18; Nehemiah 5:9; Nehemiah 5:19; Nehemiah 6:19; Nehemiah 9:13; Nehemiah 9:20; Nehemiah 9:25; Nehemiah 9:35; Nehemiah 9:36; Nehemiah 13:31; Job 7:7; Job 9:25; Job 20:21; Job 21:16; Job 22:18; Job 22:21; Job 30:26; Job 34:4; Proverbs 2:9; Proverbs 2:20; Proverbs 3:4; Proverbs 3:27; Proverbs 4:2; Proverbs 8:11; Proverbs 8:19; Proverbs 11:10; Proverbs 11:23; Proverbs 11:27; Proverbs 12:2; Proverbs 12:9; Proverbs 12:14; Proverbs 12:25; Proverbs 13:2; Proverbs 13:15; Proverbs 13:21; Proverbs 13:22; Proverbs 14:14; Proverbs 14:19; Proverbs 14:22; Proverbs 15:3; Proverbs 15:15; Proverbs 15:16; Proverbs 15:17; Proverbs 15:23; Proverbs 15:30; Proverbs 16:8; Proverbs 16:16; Proverbs 16:19; Proverbs 16:20; Proverbs 16:29; Proverbs 16:32; Proverbs 17:1; Proverbs 17:13; Proverbs 17:20; Proverbs 17:22; Proverbs 17:26; Proverbs 18:5; Proverbs 18:22; Proverbs 19:1; Proverbs 19:2; Proverbs 19:8; Proverbs 19:22; Proverbs 20:23; Proverbs 21:9; Proverbs 21:19; Proverbs 22:1; Proverbs 22:9; Proverbs 24:13; Proverbs 24:23; Proverbs 24:25; Proverbs 25:7; Proverbs 25:24; Proverbs 25:25; Proverbs 25:27; Proverbs 27:5; Proverbs 27:10; Proverbs 28:6; Proverbs 28:10; Proverbs 28:21; Proverbs 30:29; Proverbs 31:12; Proverbs 31:18; Song of Songs 1:2; Song of Songs 1:3; Song of Songs 7:9; Jonah 4:3; Jonah 4:4; Jonah 4:8; Jonah 4:9; Matthew 3:10; Matthew 5:16; Matthew 5:45; Matthew 7:11; Matthew 7:17; Matthew 7:18; Matthew 7:19; Matthew 12:12; Matthew 12:33; Matthew 12:34; Matthew 12:35; Matthew 13:8; Matthew 13:23; Matthew 13:24; Matthew 13:27; Matthew 13:37; Matthew 13:38; Matthew 13:45; Matthew 13:48; Matthew 15:26; Matthew 17:4; Matthew 18:8; Matthew 18:9; Matthew 19:16; Matthew 19:17; Matthew 20:15; Matthew 22:10; Matthew 25:21; Matthew 25:23; Matthew 26:10; Matthew 26:24; Mark 3:4; Mark 4:8; Mark 4:20; Mark 7:27; Mark 7:37; Mark 9:5; Mark 9:42; Mark 9:43; Mark 9:45; Mark 9:47; Mark 9:50; Mark 10:17; Mark 10:18; Mark 14:6; Mark 14:7; Mark 14:21; Luke 1:53; Luke 3:9; Luke 6:9; Luke 6:26; Luke 6:27; Luke 6:33; Luke 6:35; Luke 6:38; Luke 6:43; Luke 6:45; Luke 6:48; Luke 8:8; Luke 8:15; Luke 9:33; Luke 10:42; Luke 11:13; Luke 12:18; Luke 12:19; Luke 14:34; Luke 16:25; Luke 18:18; Luke 18:19; Luke 19:17; Luke 23:50; John 1:46; John 2:10; John 5:29; John 7:12; John 10:11; John 10:14; John 10:32; John 10:33; Acts 4:9; Acts 6:3; Acts 9:36; Acts 10:38; Acts 11:24; Acts 14:17; Acts 15:22; Acts 15:25; Acts 15:28; Acts 15:29; Acts 23:1; Romans 2:4; Romans 2:7; Romans 2:10; Romans 3:8; Romans 3:12; Romans 5:7; Romans 7:12; Romans 7:13; Romans 7:16; Romans 7:18; Romans 7:19; Romans 7:21; Romans 8:28; Romans 9:11; Romans 10:15; Romans 12:2; Romans 12:9; Romans 12:17; Romans 12:21; Romans 13:3; Romans 13:4; Romans 14:16; Romans 14:21; Romans 15:2; Romans 15:14; Romans 16:19; 1 Corinthians 5:6; 1 Corinthians 7:1; 1 Corinthians 7:8; 1 Corinthians 7:26; 1 Corinthians 9:15; 2 Corinthians 5:10; 2 Corinthians 8:21; 2 Corinthians 9:8; 2 Corinthians 13:7; Ephesians 1:5; Ephesians 2:10; Ephesians 4:28; Ephesians 4:29; Ephesians 5:9; Ephesians 6:8; Philippians 1:6; Philippians 1:15; Philippians 2:13; Colossians 1:10; 1 Thessalonians 3:6; 1 Thessalonians 5:15; 1 Thessalonians 5:21; 2 Thessalonians 1:11; 2 Thessalonians 2:16; 2 Thessalonians 2:17; 1 Timothy 1:5; 1 Timothy 1:8; 1 Timothy 1:18; 1 Timothy 1:19; 1 Timothy 2:3; 1 Timothy 2:10; 1 Timothy 3:1; 1 Timothy 3:7; 1 Timothy 3:13; 1 Timothy 4:4; 1 Timothy 4:6; 1 Timothy 5:10; 1 Timothy 5:25; 1 Timothy 6:12; 1 Timothy 6:13; 1 Timothy 6:18; 1 Timothy 6:19; 2 Timothy 1:14; 2 Timothy 2:3; 2 Timothy 2:21; 2 Timothy 3:17; 2 Timothy 4:7; Titus 1:8; Titus 1:16; Titus 2:5; Titus 2:7; Titus 2:10; Titus 2:14; Titus 3:1; Titus 3:8; Titus 3:14; Philemon 1:6; Philemon 1:14; Hebrews 5:14; Hebrews 6:5; Hebrews 9:11; Hebrews 10:1; Hebrews 10:24; Hebrews 12:10; Hebrews 13:9; Hebrews 13:16; Hebrews 13:18; Hebrews 13:21; James 1:17; James 2:7; James 3:13; James 3:17; James 4:17; 1 Peter 2:12; 1 Peter 2:14; 1 Peter 2:15; 1 Peter 2:18; 1 Peter 2:20; 1 Peter 3:6; 1 Peter 3:10; 1 Peter 3:11; 1 Peter 3:13; 1 Peter 3:16; 1 Peter 3:17; 1 Peter 3:21; 1 Peter 4:10; 2 Peter 1:19; 3 John 1:6; 3 John 1:11; Galatians 5:22-24
* **Associated Articles:** Evil (ID: `26576@UWTranslationWords`); Prosper (ID: `26989@UWTranslationWords`); Righteous (ID: `27035@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Good (ID: `keyterm:Good`); Honest (ID: `keyterm:Honest`)

## Good News (id: 26654)

good news, gospel
=================

Definition:
-----------

The term “gospel” literally means “good news” and refers to a message or announcement that tells people something that benefits them and makes them glad.

* In the Bible, this term usually refers to the message about God’s salvation for people through Jesus’ sacrifice on the cross.
* In most English Bibles, “good news” is usually translated as “gospel” and is also used in phrases such as, the “gospel of Jesus Christ,” the “gospel of God” and the “gospel of the kingdom.”

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* Different ways to translate this term could include, “good message” or “good announcement” or “God’s message of salvation” or “the good things God teaches about Jesus.”
* Depending on the context, ways to translate the phrase, “good news of” could include, “good news/message about” or “good message from” or “the good things God tells us about” or “what God says about how he saves people.”

(See also: kingdom, sacrifice, save)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Thessalonians 1:5](https://ref.ly/1Thess1:5)
* [Acts 8:25](https://ref.ly/Acts8:25)
* [Colossians 1:23](https://ref.ly/Col1:23)
* [Galatians 1:6](https://ref.ly/Gal1:6)
* [Luke 8:1–3](https://ref.ly/Luke8:1-Luke8:3)
* [Mark 1:14](https://ref.ly/Mark1:14)
* [Philippians 2:22](https://ref.ly/Phil2:22)
* [Romans 1:3](https://ref.ly/Rom1:3)

Examples from the Bible stories:
--------------------------------

* **23:6** The angel said, “Do not be afraid, because I have some **good news** for you. The Messiah, the Master, has been born in Bethlehem!”
* **26:3** Jesus read, “God has given me his Spirit so that I can proclaim **good news** to the poor, freedom to captives, recovery of sight for the blind, and release to the oppressed. This is the year of the Lord’s favor.”
* **45:10** Philip also used other Scriptures to tell him the **good news of Jesus**.
* **46:10** Then they sent them off to preach the **good news about Jesus** in many other places.
* **47:1** One day, Paul and his friend Silas went to the town of Philippi to proclaim the **good news about Jesus**.
* **47:13** The **good news about Jesus** kept spreading, and the Church kept growing.
* **50:1** For almost 2,000 years, more and more people around the world have been hearing the **good news about Jesus** the Messiah.
* **50:2** When Jesus was living on earth he said, “My disciples will preach the **good news** about the kingdom of God to people everywhere in the world, and then the end will come.”
* **50:3** Before he returned to heaven, Jesus told Christians to proclaim the **good news** to people who have never heard it.

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: G20970, G20980, G42830

* **Associated Passages:** Matthew 4:23; Matthew 9:35; Matthew 11:5; Matthew 24:14; Matthew 26:13; Mark 1:1; Mark 1:14; Mark 1:15; Mark 8:35; Mark 10:29; Mark 13:10; Mark 14:9; Luke 3:18; Acts 5:42; Acts 8:4; Acts 8:12; Acts 8:25; Acts 8:35; Acts 8:40; Acts 10:36; Acts 11:20; Acts 13:32; Acts 14:7; Acts 14:15; Acts 14:21; Acts 15:7; Acts 15:35; Acts 16:10; Acts 17:18; Acts 20:24; Romans 1:1; Romans 1:3; Romans 1:9; Romans 1:15; Romans 1:16; Romans 2:16; Romans 10:15; Romans 10:16; Romans 11:28; Romans 15:16; Romans 15:19; Romans 15:20; Romans 16:25; 1 Corinthians 1:17; 1 Corinthians 4:15; 1 Corinthians 9:12; 1 Corinthians 9:14; 1 Corinthians 9:16; 1 Corinthians 9:18; 1 Corinthians 9:23; 1 Corinthians 15:1; 1 Corinthians 15:2; 2 Corinthians 2:12; 2 Corinthians 4:3; 2 Corinthians 4:4; 2 Corinthians 8:18; 2 Corinthians 9:13; 2 Corinthians 10:14; 2 Corinthians 10:16; 2 Corinthians 11:4; 2 Corinthians 11:7; Galatians 1:6; Ephesians 1:13; Ephesians 2:17; Ephesians 3:6; Ephesians 3:8; Ephesians 6:15; Ephesians 6:19; Philippians 1:5; Philippians 1:7; Philippians 1:12; Philippians 1:16; Philippians 1:27; Philippians 2:22; Philippians 4:3; Philippians 4:15; Colossians 1:5; Colossians 1:23; 1 Thessalonians 1:5; 1 Thessalonians 2:2; 1 Thessalonians 2:4; 1 Thessalonians 2:8; 1 Thessalonians 2:9; 1 Thessalonians 3:2; 2 Thessalonians 1:8; 2 Thessalonians 2:14; 1 Timothy 1:11; 2 Timothy 1:8; 2 Timothy 1:10; 2 Timothy 2:8; Philemon 1:13; Hebrews 4:2; Hebrews 4:6; 1 Peter 1:12; 1 Peter 4:6; 1 Peter 4:17; Revelation 10:7; Revelation 14:6; Luke 8:1-3
* **Associated Articles:** Kingdom (ID: `26797@UWTranslationWords`); Sacrifice (ID: `27046@UWTranslationWords`); Save (ID: `27059@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Good News (ID: `keyterm:GoodNews`)

## Goshen (id: 26655)

Goshen
======

Definition:
-----------

Goshen was the name of a fertile region of land located along the Nile River in the northern part of Egypt.

* When Joseph was a ruler in Egypt, his father and brothers and their families came to live in Goshen to escape a famine in Canaan.
* They and their descendants lived well in Goshen for over 400 years, but then they were forced into slavery by the Egyptian pharaoh.
* Finally God sent Moses to help the people of Israel leave the land of Goshen and escape this slavery.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Egypt, famine, Moses, Nile River)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Exodus 8:22–24](https://ref.ly/Exod8:22-Exod8:24)
* [Genesis 45:11](https://ref.ly/Gen45:11)
* [Genesis 47:2](https://ref.ly/Gen47:2)
* [Genesis 50:7–9](https://ref.ly/Gen50:7-Gen50:9)
* [Joshua 10:40–41](https://ref.ly/Josh10:40-Josh10:41)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1657

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 45:10; Genesis 45:11; Genesis 46:28; Genesis 46:29; Genesis 46:34; Genesis 47:1; Genesis 47:2; Genesis 47:4; Genesis 47:6; Genesis 47:27; Genesis 50:8; Exodus 8:22; Exodus 9:26; Genesis 50:7-9; Joshua 10:40-41; Exodus 8:22-24
* **Associated Articles:** Egypt (ID: `26548@UWTranslationWords`); Famine (ID: `26590@UWTranslationWords`); Moses (ID: `26889@UWTranslationWords`); Nile River (ID: `26911@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Goshen (ID: `place:Goshen.2`); Goshen (ID: `place:Goshen`)

## Gossip (id: 26656)

gossip, gossips, talk nonsense
==============================

Definition:
-----------

The term “gossip” refers to talking to people about someone else’s personal affairs, usually in a negative and unproductive way. Often what is talked about has not been confirmed as true.

* The Bible says that spreading negative information about people is wrong. Gossip and slander are examples of this kind of negative speech.
* Gossip is harmful to the person being spoken about because it often hurts someone’s relationships with other people.

(See also: slander)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Timothy 5:13](https://ref.ly/1Tim5:13)
* [2 Corinthians 12:20](https://ref.ly/2Cor12:20)
* [Leviticus 19:15–16](https://ref.ly/Lev19:15-Lev19:16)
* [Proverbs 16:28](https://ref.ly/Prov16:28)
* [Romans 1:29–31](https://ref.ly/Rom1:29-Rom1:31)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H5372, G26360, G53970

* **Associated Passages:** Proverbs 16:28; Romans 1:29; 2 Corinthians 12:20; 1 Timothy 5:13; Romans 1:29-31; Leviticus 19:15-16
* **Associated Articles:** Slander (ID: `27102@UWTranslationWords`)


## Governor (id: 26657)

govern, governor, proconsul, Tirshatha
======================================

Definition:
-----------

A “governor” is a person who rules over a large area of land (such as a territory, region, or province) within a nation or empire.

* In the Old Testament, the term “Tirshatha” is a more specific title for a governor who ruled over a Persian province.
* In the New Testament, the term “proconsul” is a more specific title for a governor who ruled over a Roman province.
* In Bible times, governors were appointed by a king or emperor and were under his authority.
* A “government” consists of all the rulers who govern a certain country or empire. These rulers make laws that guide the behavior of their citizens so that there is peace, safety, and prosperity for all the people of that nation.

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* The word “governor” can also be translated as “ruler” or “overseer” or “regional leader” or “one who rules over a small territory.”
* Depending on the context, the term “govern” could also be translated as “rule over” or “lead” or “manage” or “supervise.”
* The term “governor” should be translated differently than the terms for “king” or “emperor”, since a governor was a less powerful ruler who was under their authority.
* The term “proconsul” could also be translated as “Roman governor” or “Roman provincial ruler.”

(See also: authority, king, power, province, Rome, ruler)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Acts 7:9–10](https://ref.ly/Acts7:9-Acts7:10)
* [Acts 23:22](https://ref.ly/Acts23:22)
* [Acts 26:30](https://ref.ly/Acts26:30)
* [Mark 13:9–10](https://ref.ly/Mark13:9-Mark13:10)
* [Matthew 10:18](https://ref.ly/Matt10:18)
* [Matthew 27:1–2](https://ref.ly/Matt27:1-Matt27:2)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0324, H1777, H2280, H4951, H5148, H5460, H6346, H6347, H6486, H7989, H8269, H8660, G04450, G04460, G07460, G14810, G22320, G22330, G22300, G42320

* **Associated Passages:** Ezra 2:63; Ezra 5:3; Ezra 5:6; Ezra 5:14; Ezra 6:6; Ezra 6:7; Ezra 6:13; Ezra 8:36; Nehemiah 2:7; Nehemiah 2:9; Nehemiah 3:7; Nehemiah 5:14; Nehemiah 5:15; Nehemiah 5:18; Nehemiah 7:65; Nehemiah 7:70; Nehemiah 8:9; Nehemiah 10:1; Nehemiah 12:26; Haggai 1:1; Haggai 1:14; Haggai 2:2; Haggai 2:21; Matthew 2:6; Matthew 10:18; Matthew 27:2; Matthew 27:11; Matthew 27:14; Matthew 27:15; Matthew 27:21; Matthew 27:27; Matthew 28:14; Mark 13:9; Luke 2:2; Luke 3:1; Luke 20:20; Luke 21:12; Acts 7:10; Acts 23:22; Acts 23:24; Acts 23:26; Acts 23:33; Acts 24:1; Acts 24:10; Acts 26:30; 2 Corinthians 11:32; 1 Peter 2:14; Matthew 27:1-2; Acts 7:9-10; Mark 13:9-10
* **Associated Articles:** Authority (ID: `26350@UWTranslationWords`); King (ID: `26796@UWTranslationWords`); Province (ID: `26995@UWTranslationWords`); Rome (ID: `27039@UWTranslationWords`); Ruler (ID: `27042@UWTranslationWords`)


## Grace (id: 26658)

grace, gracious
===============

Definition:
-----------

The word “grace” refers to help or blessing that is given to someone who has not earned it. The term “gracious” describes someone who shows grace to others.

* God’s grace toward sinful human beings is a gift that is freely given.
* The concept of grace also refers to being kind and forgiving to someone who has done wrong or hurtful things.
* The expression to “find grace” is an expression that means to receive help and mercy from God. Often it includes the meaning that God is pleased with someone and helps him.

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* Other ways that “grace” could be translated include “divine kindness” or “God’s favor” or “God’s kindness and forgiveness for sinners” or “merciful kindness.”
* The term “gracious” could be translated as “full of grace” or “kind” or “merciful” or “mercifully kind.”
* The expression “he found grace in the eyes of God” could be translated as “he received mercy from God” or “God mercifully helped him” or “God showed his favor to him” or “God was pleased with him and helped him.”

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Acts 4:33](https://ref.ly/Acts4:33)
* [Acts 6:8](https://ref.ly/Acts6:8)
* [Acts 14:4](https://ref.ly/Acts14:4)
* [Colossians 4:6](https://ref.ly/Col4:6)
* [Colossians 4:18](https://ref.ly/Col4:18)
* [Genesis 43:28–29](https://ref.ly/Gen43:28-Gen43:29)
* [James 4:7](https://ref.ly/Jas4:7)
* [John 1:16](https://ref.ly/John1:16)
* [Philippians 4:21–23](https://ref.ly/Phil4:21-Phil4:23)
* [Revelation 22:20–21](https://ref.ly/Rev22:20-Rev22:21)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H2580, H2587, H2589, H2603, H8467, G21430, G54850, G55430

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 43:29; Exodus 22:27; Exodus 34:6; Nehemiah 9:17; Nehemiah 9:31; Proverbs 5:19; Proverbs 11:16; Proverbs 22:11; Proverbs 26:25; Jonah 4:2; Luke 2:40; Luke 4:22; John 1:14; John 1:16; John 1:17; Acts 4:33; Acts 6:8; Acts 11:23; Acts 13:43; Acts 14:4; Acts 14:26; Acts 15:11; Acts 15:40; Acts 18:27; Acts 20:24; Acts 20:32; Romans 1:5; Romans 1:7; Romans 3:24; Romans 4:4; Romans 4:16; Romans 5:2; Romans 5:15; Romans 5:17; Romans 5:20; Romans 5:21; Romans 6:1; Romans 6:14; Romans 6:15; Romans 11:5; Romans 11:6; Romans 12:3; Romans 12:6; Romans 15:15; Romans 16:20; 1 Corinthians 1:3; 1 Corinthians 1:4; 1 Corinthians 3:10; 1 Corinthians 15:10; 1 Corinthians 16:23; 2 Corinthians 1:2; 2 Corinthians 1:12; 2 Corinthians 1:15; 2 Corinthians 4:15; 2 Corinthians 6:1; 2 Corinthians 8:1; 2 Corinthians 8:4; 2 Corinthians 8:6; 2 Corinthians 8:7; 2 Corinthians 8:9; 2 Corinthians 8:16; 2 Corinthians 8:19; 2 Corinthians 9:8; 2 Corinthians 9:14; 2 Corinthians 12:9; 2 Corinthians 13:13; Ephesians 1:2; Ephesians 1:6; Ephesians 1:7; Ephesians 2:5; Ephesians 2:7; Ephesians 2:8; Ephesians 3:2; Ephesians 3:7; Ephesians 3:8; Ephesians 4:7; Ephesians 4:29; Ephesians 6:24; Philippians 1:2; Philippians 1:7; Philippians 4:23; Colossians 1:2; Colossians 1:6; Colossians 3:16; Colossians 4:6; Colossians 4:18; 1 Thessalonians 1:1; 1 Thessalonians 5:28; 2 Thessalonians 1:2; 2 Thessalonians 1:12; 2 Thessalonians 2:16; 2 Thessalonians 3:18; 1 Timothy 1:2; 1 Timothy 1:14; 1 Timothy 6:21; 2 Timothy 1:2; 2 Timothy 1:9; 2 Timothy 2:1; 2 Timothy 4:22; Titus 1:4; Titus 2:11; Titus 3:7; Titus 3:15; Philemon 1:3; Philemon 1:25; Hebrews 2:9; Hebrews 4:16; Hebrews 10:29; Hebrews 12:15; Hebrews 12:28; Hebrews 13:9; Hebrews 13:25; James 4:6; James 4:7; 1 Peter 1:2; 1 Peter 1:10; 1 Peter 1:13; 1 Peter 3:7; 1 Peter 4:10; 1 Peter 5:5; 1 Peter 5:10; 1 Peter 5:12; 2 Peter 1:2; 2 Peter 3:18; 2 John 1:3; Jude 1:4; Revelation 1:4; Revelation 22:21; Philippians 4:21-23; Revelation 22:20-21; Genesis 43:28-29

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Favor (ID: `keyterm:Favor`); Kindness (ID: `keyterm:Kindness`)

## Grain (id: 26659)

grain, grainfields
==================

Definition:
-----------

The term “grain” usually refers to the seed of a food plant such as wheat, barley, corn, millet, or rice. It can also refer to the whole plant.

* In the Bible, the main grains that are referred to are wheat and barley.
* A head of grain is the part of the plant that holds the grain.
* Note that some older Bible versions use the word “corn” to refer to grain in general. In modern English however, “corn” only refers to one type of grain.

(See also: head, wheat)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Genesis 42:3](https://ref.ly/Gen42:3)
* [Genesis 42:26–28](https://ref.ly/Gen42:26-Gen42:28)
* [Genesis 43:1–2](https://ref.ly/Gen43:1-Gen43:2)
* [Luke 6:2](https://ref.ly/Luke6:2)
* [Mark 2:24](https://ref.ly/Mark2:24)
* [Matthew 13:7–9](https://ref.ly/Matt13:7-Matt13:9)
* [Ruth 1:22](https://ref.ly/Ruth1:22)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1250, H1430, H1715, H2233, H2591, H3759, H3899, H7054, H7383, H7641, H7668, G02480, G25900, G34500, G46210, G47190

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 27:28; Genesis 27:37; Genesis 41:5; Genesis 41:6; Genesis 41:7; Genesis 41:22; Genesis 41:23; Genesis 41:24; Genesis 41:26; Genesis 41:27; Genesis 41:35; Genesis 41:49; Genesis 42:1; Genesis 42:2; Genesis 42:3; Genesis 42:19; Genesis 42:25; Genesis 42:26; Genesis 43:2; Genesis 44:2; Genesis 45:23; Genesis 47:14; Ruth 1:22; Ruth 2:2; Nehemiah 5:2; Nehemiah 5:3; Nehemiah 5:10; Nehemiah 5:11; Nehemiah 10:31; Nehemiah 10:39; Nehemiah 13:5; Nehemiah 13:12; Proverbs 11:26; Proverbs 14:4; Proverbs 27:22; Haggai 1:11; Matthew 12:1; Matthew 13:31; Matthew 17:20; Mark 2:23; Mark 2:24; Mark 4:28; Luke 6:1; Luke 6:2; Luke 12:18; Luke 13:19; Luke 17:6; John 12:24; Acts 7:12; 1 Corinthians 15:37; Genesis 43:1-2; Genesis 42:26-28; Matthew 13:7-9
* **Associated Articles:** Wheat (ID: `27203@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Grain (ID: `flora:Grain`); Wheat (ID: `flora:Wheat`)

## Grain Offering (id: 26660)

grain offering
==============

Definition:
-----------

A grain offering was a gift of wheat or barley flour offered to God, often after a burnt offering.

* The grain used for the grain offering had to be finely ground up. Sometimes it was cooked before being offered, but other times it was left uncooked.
* Oil and salt were added to the grain flour, but no yeast or honey was permitted.
* Part of the grain offering was burned up and part of it was eaten by the priests.

(See also: burnt offering, guilt offering, sacrifice, sin offering)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Chronicles 23:27–29](https://ref.ly/1Chr23:27-1Chr23:29)
* [Exodus 29:41–42](https://ref.ly/Exod29:41-Exod29:42)
* [Judges 13:19](https://ref.ly/Judg13:19)
* [Leviticus 2:2](https://ref.ly/Lev2:2)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H4503, H8641

* **Associated Passages:** Exodus 29:41; Exodus 30:9; Exodus 40:29; Leviticus 2:2; Judges 13:19; Ezra 7:17; Zephaniah 3:10; 1 Chronicles 23:27-29; Exodus 29:41-42
* **Associated Articles:** Burnt Offering (ID: `26418@UWTranslationWords`); Guilt Offering (ID: `26665@UWTranslationWords`); Sacrifice (ID: `27046@UWTranslationWords`); Sin Offering (ID: `27100@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Offering (ID: `keyterm:Offering`)

## Grape (id: 26661)

grape, grapevine
================

Definition:
-----------

A grape is a small, round, smooth\-skinned berry fruit that grows in clusters on vines. The juice of grapes is used in making wine.

* There are different colors of grapes, such as light green, purple, or red.
* Individiual grapes can be around one to three centimeters in size.
* People grow grapes in gardens called vineyards. These normally consist of long rows of vines.
* Grapes were a very important food during Bible times and having vineyards was a sign of wealth.
* In order to keep grapes from rotting, people would often dry them. Dried grapes are called “raisins” and they were used to make raisin cakes.
* Jesus told a parable about a grape vineyard to teach his disciples about God’s kingdom.

(See also: vine, vineyard, wine)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Deuteronomy 23:24](https://ref.ly/Deut23:24)
* [Hosea 9:10](https://ref.ly/Hos9:10)
* [Job 15:33](https://ref.ly/Job15:33)
* [Luke 6:43–44](https://ref.ly/Luke6:43-Luke6:44)
* [Matthew 7:15–17](https://ref.ly/Matt7:15-Matt7:17)
* [Matthew 21:33](https://ref.ly/Matt21:33)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0811, H0891, H1154, H1155, H1210, H3196, H5955, H6025, H6528, G02880, G47180

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 40:10; Genesis 40:11; Genesis 49:11; Deuteronomy 23:24; Nehemiah 13:15; Job 15:33; Hosea 9:10; Matthew 7:16; Matthew 21:33; Luke 6:44; Revelation 14:18; Luke 6:43-44; Matthew 7:15-17
* **Associated Articles:** Vine (ID: `27193@UWTranslationWords`); Vineyard (ID: `27194@UWTranslationWords`); Wine (ID: `27205@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Vine (ID: `flora:Vine`)

## Greece (id: 26662)

Greece, Grecian
===============

Facts:
------

During New Testament times, Greece was a province in the Roman Empire.

* Like the modern\-day country of Greece, it was located on a peninsula that is bordered by the Mediterranean Sea, the Aegean Sea, and the Ionian Sea.
* The apostle Paul visited several cities in Greece and established churches in the cities of Corinth, Thessalonica, and Philippi and probably others.
* People who are from Greece are called “Greeks” and their language is “Greek.” People from other Roman provinces also spoke Greek, including many Jews.
* Sometimes the term “Greek” is used to refer to a Gentile.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Corinth, Gentile, Greek, Hebrew, Philippi, Thessalonica)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Daniel 8:21](https://ref.ly/Dan8:21)
* [Daniel 10:20–21](https://ref.ly/Dan10:20-Dan10:21)
* [Daniel 11:1–2](https://ref.ly/Dan11:1-Dan11:2)
* [Zechariah 9:13](https://ref.ly/Zech9:13)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H3120, G16710

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 10:2; Genesis 10:4; Daniel 8:21; Zechariah 9:13; Acts 20:2; Daniel 10:20-21; Daniel 11:1-2
* **Associated Articles:** Corinth (ID: `26470@UWTranslationWords`); Gentile (ID: `26631@UWTranslationWords`); Greek (ID: `26663@UWTranslationWords`); Hebrew (ID: `26684@UWTranslationWords`); Philippi (ID: `26955@UWTranslationWords`); Thessalonica (ID: `27153@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Greece (ID: `place:Greece`)

## Greek (id: 26663)

Greek, Grecian, Hellenist
=========================

Facts:
------

The term “Greek” refers to the language spoken in the country of Greece, it is also a person from the country of Greece. Greek was also spoken throughout the Roman Empire. The adjective “Grecian” means “Greek\-speaking.”

* Since most non\-Jewish people in the Roman Empire spoke Greek, Gentiles are often referred to as “Greeks” in the New Testament, especially when contrasted with Jews.
* The phrase “Grecian Jews” or “Hellenists” referred to Jews who spoke Greek in contrast to the “Hebraic Jews” who spoke only Hebrew, or perhaps Aramaic. The term “Hellenists” comes from the pronunciation of the Greek word for a Greek\-speaker.
* Other ways to translate “Grecian” could include, “Greek\-speaking” or “culturally Greek” or “Greek.”
* When referring to non\-Jews, “Greek” could be translated as “Gentile.”

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Aram, Gentile, Greece, Hebrew, Rome)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Acts 6:1](https://ref.ly/Acts6:1)
* [Acts 9:29](https://ref.ly/Acts9:29)
* [Acts 11:20](https://ref.ly/Acts11:20)
* [Acts 14:1–2](https://ref.ly/Acts14:1-Acts14:2)
* [Colossians 3:11](https://ref.ly/Col3:11)
* [Galatians 2:3–5](https://ref.ly/Gal2:3-Gal2:5)
* [John 7:35](https://ref.ly/John7:35)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H3125, G16720, G16730, G16740, G16750, G16760

* **Associated Passages:** Mark 7:26; John 7:35; John 12:20; John 19:20; Acts 6:1; Acts 9:29; Acts 11:20; Acts 14:1; Acts 16:1; Acts 16:3; Acts 17:4; Acts 17:12; Acts 18:4; Acts 19:10; Acts 19:17; Acts 20:21; Acts 21:28; Acts 21:37; Romans 1:14; Romans 1:16; Romans 2:9; Romans 2:10; Romans 3:9; Romans 10:12; 1 Corinthians 1:22; 1 Corinthians 1:24; 1 Corinthians 10:32; 1 Corinthians 12:13; Colossians 3:11; Revelation 9:11; Galatians 2:3-5; Acts 14:1-2
* **Associated Articles:** Aram (ID: `26329@UWTranslationWords`); Gentile (ID: `26631@UWTranslationWords`); Greece (ID: `26662@UWTranslationWords`); Hebrew (ID: `26684@UWTranslationWords`); Rome (ID: `27039@UWTranslationWords`); John 12:20 (#2) (ID: `212318@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Greeks (ID: `group:Greek`); Javan (ID: `person:Javan`)

## Guilt (id: 26664)

guilt, guilty
=============

Definition:
-----------

The term “guilt” refers to the fact of having sinned or committed a crime.

* To “be guilty” means to have done something morally wrong, that is, to have disobeyed God.
* The opposite of “guilty” is “innocent.”

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* Some languages might translate “guilt” as “the weight of sin” or “the counting of sins.”
* Ways to translate to “be guilty” could include a word or phrase that means, to “be at fault” or “having done something morally wrong” or “having committed a sin.”

(See also: innocent, iniquity, punish, sin)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Exodus 28:36–38](https://ref.ly/Exod28:36-Exod28:38)
* [Isaiah 6:7](https://ref.ly/Isa6:7)
* [James 2:10–11](https://ref.ly/Jas2:10-Jas2:11)
* [John 19:4](https://ref.ly/John19:4)
* [Jonah 1:14](https://ref.ly/Jonah1:14)

Examples from the Bible stories:
--------------------------------

* **39:2** They brought many witnesses who lied about him (Jesus). However, their statements did not agree with each other, so the Jewish leaders could not prove he was **guilty** of anything.
* **39:11** After speaking with Jesus, Pilate went out to the crowd and said, “I find no **guilt** in this man.” But the Jewish leaders and the crowd shouted, “Crucify him!” Pilate replied, “He is not **guilty**.” But they shouted even louder. Then Pilate said a third time, “He is not **guilty**!”
* **40:4** Jesus was crucified between two robbers. One of them mocked Jesus, but the other said, “Don’t you fear God? We are **guilty**, but this man is innocent.”
* **49:10** Because of your sin, you are **guilty** and deserve to die.

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0816, H0817, H0818, H5352, H5355, H7563, G03380, G17770, G37840, G52670

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 26:10; Genesis 42:21; Exodus 2:13; Exodus 9:27; Exodus 22:9; Ezra 9:6; Ezra 9:7; Ezra 9:13; Ezra 9:15; Ezra 10:10; Ezra 10:19; Proverbs 21:8; Proverbs 30:10; Isaiah 6:7; Jonah 1:14; Mark 3:29; John 18:38; John 19:4; John 19:6; 1 Corinthians 11:27; James 2:10; Exodus 28:36-38; James 2:10-11
* **Associated Articles:** Iniquity (ID: `26726@UWTranslationWords`); Innocent (ID: `26727@UWTranslationWords`); Punish (ID: `26999@UWTranslationWords`); Sin (ID: `27098@UWTranslationWords`)


## Guilt Offering (id: 26665)

guilt offering
==============

Definition:
-----------

A guilt offering was an offering or sacrifice that God required an Israelite to make if he had accidentally did something wrong such as disrespect God or damage another person’s property.

* This offering involved the sacrifice of an animal and the payment of a fine, with silver or gold money.
* In addition, the person at fault was responsible to pay for any damage that was done.

(See also: burnt offering, grain offering, sacrifice, sin offering)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Samuel 6:3](https://ref.ly/1Sam6:3)
* [2 Kings 12:16](https://ref.ly/2Kgs12:16)
* [Leviticus 5:5–6](https://ref.ly/Lev5:5-Lev5:6)
* [Numbers 6:12](https://ref.ly/Num6:12)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0817

* **Associated Passages:** Numbers 6:12; 1 Samuel 6:3; 2 Kings 12:16; Proverbs 14:9; Leviticus 5:5-6
* **Associated Articles:** Burnt Offering (ID: `26418@UWTranslationWords`); Grain Offering (ID: `26660@UWTranslationWords`); Sacrifice (ID: `27046@UWTranslationWords`); Sin Offering (ID: `27100@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Offering (ID: `keyterm:Offering`)
