# Translation Words (unfoldingWord)

**unfoldingWord® Translation Words** © 2022 unfoldingWord. Released under CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. *unfoldingWord® Translation Words* has been adapted in the following languages: Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文) from *unfoldingWord® Translation Words* © 2022 unfoldingWord. Released under CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license by Mission Mutual



--------------------------------

## Naaman (id: 26897)

Naaman
======

Facts:
------

In the Old Testament, Naaman was the commander of the army of the king of Aram.

* Naaman had a terrible skin disease called leprosy that could not be cured.
* A Jewish slave in Naaman’s household told him to go ask the prophet Elisha to heal him.
* Elisha told Naaman to wash seven times in the Jordan River. When Naaman obeyed, God healed him of his disease.
* As a result, Naaman came to believe in the only true God, Yahweh.
* Two other men named Naaman were descendants of Jacob’s son Benjamin.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Aram, Jordan River, leprosy, prophet)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Chronicles 8:6–7](https://ref.ly/1Chr8:6-1Chr8:7)
* [2 Kings 5:1](https://ref.ly/2Kgs5:1)
* [Luke 4:27](https://ref.ly/Luke4:27)

Examples from the Bible stories:
--------------------------------

* **19:14** One of the miracles happened to **Naaman**, an enemy commander, who had a horrible skin disease.
* **19:15** At first **Naaman** was angry and would not do it because it seemed foolish. But later he changed his mind and dipped himself seven times in the Jordan River.
* **26:6** “He (Elisha) only healed the skin disease of **Naaman**, a commander of Israel’s enemies.”

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H5283, G34970

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 46:21; 2 Kings 5:1; Luke 4:27; 1 Chronicles 8:6-7
* **Associated Articles:** Aram (ID: `26329@UWTranslationWords`); Jordan River (ID: `26775@UWTranslationWords`); Leprosy (ID: `26823@UWTranslationWords`); Prophet (ID: `26987@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Naaman (ID: `person:Naaman.2`); Naaman (ID: `person:Naaman.3`); Naaman (ID: `person:Naaman.4`); Naaman (ID: `person:Naaman`)
## Nahor (id: 26898)

Nahor
=====

Facts:
------

Nahor was the name of two relatives of Abraham, his grandfather and his brother.

* Abraham’s brother Nahor was the grandfather of Isaac’s wife Rebekah.
* The phrase “city of Nahor” could mean “the city named Nahor” or “the city where Nahor had lived” or “Nahor’s city.”

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Abraham, Rebekah)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Chronicles 1:24–27](https://ref.ly/1Chr1:24-1Chr1:27)
* [Genesis 31:53](https://ref.ly/Gen31:53)
* [Joshua 24:2](https://ref.ly/Josh24:2)
* [Luke 3:34](https://ref.ly/Luke3:34)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H5152, G34930

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 11:22; Genesis 11:23; Genesis 11:24; Genesis 11:25; Genesis 11:26; Genesis 11:27; Genesis 11:29; Genesis 22:20; Genesis 22:23; Genesis 24:10; Genesis 24:15; Genesis 24:24; Genesis 24:47; Genesis 29:5; Genesis 31:53; Joshua 24:2; Luke 3:34; 1 Chronicles 1:24-27
* **Associated Articles:** Abraham (ID: `26282@UWTranslationWords`); Rebekah (ID: `27014@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Nahor (ID: `person:Nahor.2`); Nahor (ID: `person:Nahor`); Nahor (ID: `place:Nahor`); Abraham (ID: `person:Abraham`)
## Nahum (id: 26899)

Nahum
=====

Facts:
------

Nahum was a prophet who preached during the time when the evil King Manasseh was ruling over Judah.

* Nahum was from the town of Elkosh, which was about 20 miles from Jerusalem.
* The Old Testament book of Nahum records his prophecies about the destruction of the Assyrian city of Nineveh.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Assyria, Manasseh, prophet, Nineveh)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Nahum 1:1](https://ref.ly/Nah1:1)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H5151, G34860

* **Associated Passages:** Nahum 1:1
* **Associated Articles:** Assyria (ID: `26346@UWTranslationWords`); Manasseh (ID: `26851@UWTranslationWords`); Nineveh (ID: `26912@UWTranslationWords`); Prophet (ID: `26987@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Nahum (ID: `person:Nahum.2`); Nahum (ID: `person:Nahum`); Elkosh (ID: `place:Elkosh`); Nineveh (ID: `place:Nineveh`); Scroll (ID: `realia:Scroll`)
## Naphtali (id: 26900)

Naphtali
========

Facts:
------

Naphtali was Jacob’s sixth son. He was Bilhah’s second son. His descendants became one of the tribes of Israel.

* The tribe descended from him was known as the “tribe of Naphtali” or “Naphtali” or “Naphtalites.”
* The name Naphtali is similar to the Hebrew word meaning “to twist, wrestle.”
* The tribe of Naphtali settled in the northern part of Canaan, between the tribes of Manassah and Asher. Its eastern border was on the western shoreline of the Sea of Chinnereth. When used as the name of a region of land, the term “Naphtali” refers to the land given to the tribe of Naphtali.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: twelve tribes of Israel, Jacob, Bilhah)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Kings 4:15](https://ref.ly/1Kgs4:15)
* [Deuteronomy 27:13–14](https://ref.ly/Deut27:13-Deut27:14)
* [Ezekiel 48:1–3](https://ref.ly/Ezek48:1-Ezek48:3)
* [Genesis 30:8](https://ref.ly/Gen30:8)
* [Judges 1:33](https://ref.ly/Judg1:33)
* [Matthew 4:13](https://ref.ly/Matt4:13)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H5321, G35080

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 30:8; Genesis 35:25; Genesis 46:24; Genesis 49:21; Exodus 1:4; Judges 1:33; 1 Kings 4:15; Matthew 4:13; Matthew 4:15; Revelation 7:6; Ezekiel 48:1-3; Deuteronomy 27:13-14
* **Associated Articles:** 12 Tribes of Israel (ID: `26274@UWTranslationWords`); Bilhah (ID: `26398@UWTranslationWords`); Jacob (ID: `26739@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Naphtali (ID: `person:Naphtali`); Tribe of Naphtali (ID: `group:Naphtali`)
## Nathan (id: 26901)

Nathan
======

Facts:
------

Nathan was a faithful prophet of God who lived while David was king over Israel.

* God sent Nathan to confront David after David sinned grievously against Uriah.
* Nathan rebuked David in spite of the fact that David was the king.
* David repented of his sin after Nathan confronted him.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: David, faithful, prophet, Uriah)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Chronicles 17:1–2](https://ref.ly/1Chr17:1-1Chr17:2)
* [2 Chronicles 9:29](https://ref.ly/2Chr9:29)
* [2 Samuel 12:1–3](https://ref.ly/2Sam12:1-2Sam12:3)
* [Psalm 51:1](https://ref.ly/Ps51:1)

Examples from the Bible stories:
--------------------------------

* **17:7** God sent the prophet **Nathan** to David with this message, “Because you are a man of war, you will not build this Temple for me.”
* **17:13** God was very angry about what David had done, so he sent the prophet **Nathan** to tell David how evil his sin was.

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H5416, G34810

* **Associated Passages:** 2 Chronicles 9:29; Ezra 8:16; Ezra 10:39; Psalms 51:1; Luke 3:31; 1 Chronicles 17:1-2; 2 Samuel 12:1-3
* **Associated Articles:** David (ID: `26503@UWTranslationWords`); Faithful (ID: `26584@UWTranslationWords`); Prophet (ID: `26987@UWTranslationWords`); Uriah (ID: `27188@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Nathan (ID: `person:Nathan.2`); Nathan (ID: `person:Nathan.3`); Nathan (ID: `person:Nathan.4`); Nathan (ID: `person:Nathan.5`); Nathan (ID: `person:Nathan.6`); Nathan (ID: `person:Nathan`); Elnathan (ID: `person:Elnathan.3`); Elnathan (ID: `person:Elnathan.4`); Elnathan (ID: `person:Elnathan.2`)
## Nation (id: 26902)

nation
======

Definition:
-----------

A nation is a large group of people ruled by some form of government. The people of a nation often have the same ancestors and share a common ethnicity.

* A “nation” usually has a well\-defined culture and territorial boundaries.
* In the Bible, a “nation” could be a country (like Egypt or Ethiopia), but often it is more general and refers to a people group, especially when used in the plural. It is important to check the context.
* Nations in the Bible included the Israelites, the Philistines, the Assyrians, the Babylonians, the Canaanites, the Romans, and the Greeks, among many others.
* Sometimes the word “nation” was used figuratively to refer to the ancestor of a certain people group, as when Rebekah was told by God that her unborn sons were “nations” that would fight against each other. This could be translated as “the founders of two nations” or the “ancestors of two people groups.”
* The word translated as “nation” was also sometimes used to refer to “Gentiles” or to people who do not worship Yahweh. The context usually makes the meaning clear.

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* Depending on the context, the word “nation” could also be translated as “people group” or “people” or “country.”
* If a language has a term for “nation” that is distinct from these other terms, then that term can be used wherever it occurs in the Bible text, as long as it is natural and accurate in each context.
* The plural term “nations” can often be translated as “people groups.”
* In certain contexts, this term could also be translated as “Gentiles” or “nonJews.”

(See also: Assyria, Babylon, Canaan, Gentile, Greek, people group, Philistines, Rome)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Chronicles 14:15–17](https://ref.ly/1Chr14:15-1Chr14:17)
* [2 Chronicles 15:6](https://ref.ly/2Chr15:6)
* [2 Kings 17:11–12](https://ref.ly/2Kgs17:11-2Kgs17:12)
* [Acts 2:5](https://ref.ly/Acts2:5)
* [Acts 13:19](https://ref.ly/Acts13:19)
* [Acts 17:26](https://ref.ly/Acts17:26)
* [Acts 26:4](https://ref.ly/Acts26:4)
* [Daniel 3:4](https://ref.ly/Dan3:4)
* [Genesis 10:2–5](https://ref.ly/Gen10:2-Gen10:5)
* [Genesis 27:29](https://ref.ly/Gen27:29)
* [Genesis 35:11](https://ref.ly/Gen35:11)
* [Genesis 49:10](https://ref.ly/Gen49:10)
* [Luke 7:5](https://ref.ly/Luke7:5)
* [Mark 13:7–8](https://ref.ly/Mark13:7-Mark13:8)
* [Matthew 21:43](https://ref.ly/Matt21:43)
* [Romans 4:16–17](https://ref.ly/Rom4:16-Rom4:17)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0523, H0524, H0776, H1471, H3816, H4940, H5971, G02460, G10740, G10850, G14840

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 10:5; Genesis 10:20; Genesis 10:31; Genesis 10:32; Genesis 12:2; Genesis 15:14; Genesis 17:4; Genesis 17:5; Genesis 17:6; Genesis 17:16; Genesis 17:20; Genesis 18:18; Genesis 20:4; Genesis 21:13; Genesis 21:18; Genesis 22:18; Genesis 25:23; Genesis 26:4; Genesis 27:29; Genesis 35:11; Genesis 46:3; Genesis 48:19; Genesis 49:10; Exodus 9:24; Exodus 19:6; Exodus 32:10; Exodus 33:13; Exodus 34:10; Exodus 34:24; 2 Chronicles 15:6; Ezra 4:10; Ezra 6:21; Nehemiah 5:8; Nehemiah 5:9; Nehemiah 5:17; Nehemiah 6:6; Nehemiah 6:16; Nehemiah 13:26; Job 12:23; Job 34:29; Proverbs 14:34; Proverbs 24:24; Proverbs 30:25; Proverbs 30:26; Daniel 3:4; Obadiah 1:1; Obadiah 1:2; Obadiah 1:15; Obadiah 1:16; Zephaniah 2:1; Zephaniah 2:5; Zephaniah 2:9; Zephaniah 2:11; Zephaniah 2:14; Zephaniah 3:6; Zephaniah 3:8; Haggai 2:7; Haggai 2:14; Haggai 2:22; Matthew 21:43; Matthew 24:7; Matthew 24:9; Matthew 24:14; Matthew 25:32; Matthew 28:19; Mark 11:17; Mark 13:8; Mark 13:10; Luke 7:5; Luke 12:30; Luke 21:10; Luke 21:24; Luke 21:25; Luke 23:2; Luke 24:47; John 11:48; John 11:50; John 11:51; John 11:52; John 18:35; Acts 2:5; Acts 7:7; Acts 7:45; Acts 8:9; Acts 10:22; Acts 10:35; Acts 13:19; Acts 14:16; Acts 17:26; Acts 24:2; Acts 24:10; Acts 24:17; Acts 26:4; Acts 28:19; Romans 4:17; Romans 4:18; Romans 10:19; Romans 16:26; 1 Timothy 3:16; 1 Peter 2:9; Revelation 2:26; Revelation 5:9; Revelation 7:9; Revelation 10:11; Revelation 11:9; Revelation 11:18; Revelation 12:5; Revelation 13:7; Revelation 14:6; Revelation 14:8; Revelation 15:4; Revelation 16:19; Revelation 17:15; Revelation 18:3; Revelation 18:23; Revelation 19:15; Revelation 20:3; Revelation 20:8; Revelation 21:24; Revelation 21:26; Revelation 22:2; Genesis 10:2-5; 1 Chronicles 14:15-17; 2 Kings 17:11-12; Mark 13:7-8; Romans 4:16-17
* **Associated Articles:** Assyria (ID: `26346@UWTranslationWords`); Babylon (ID: `26358@UWTranslationWords`); Canaan (ID: `26430@UWTranslationWords`); Gentile (ID: `26631@UWTranslationWords`); Greek (ID: `26663@UWTranslationWords`); People Group (ID: `26941@UWTranslationWords`); Philistines (ID: `26958@UWTranslationWords`); Rome (ID: `27039@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Gentiles (ID: `group:Gentile`)
## Nazareth (id: 26903)

Nazareth, Nazarene
==================

Facts:
------

Nazareth is a town in the region of Galilee in northern Israel. It is about 100 kilometers north of Jerusalem, and it takes about three to five days to travel there on foot.

* Joseph and Mary were from Nazareth, and this is where they raised Jesus. That is why Jesus was known as “the Nazarene.”
* Many of the Jews living in Nazareth did not respect Jesus’ teaching because he had grown up among them, and they thought he was just an ordinary person.
* Once, when Jesus was teaching in Nazareths synagogue, the Jews there tried to kill him because he claimed to be the Messiah and had rebuked them for rejecting him.
* The remark Nathaniel made when he heard that Jesus was from Nazareth indicated that this city was not thought of very highly.

(See also: Christ, Galilee, Joseph (NT), Mary)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Acts 26:9–11](https://ref.ly/Acts26:9-Acts26:11)
* [John 1:43–45](https://ref.ly/John1:43-John1:45)
* [Luke 1:26–29](https://ref.ly/Luke1:26-Luke1:29)
* [Mark 16:5–7](https://ref.ly/Mark16:5-Mark16:7)
* [Matthew 2:23](https://ref.ly/Matt2:23)
* [Matthew 21:9–11](https://ref.ly/Matt21:9-Matt21:11)
* [Matthew 26:71–72](https://ref.ly/Matt26:71-Matt26:72)

Examples from the Bible stories:
--------------------------------

* **23:4** Joseph and Mary had to make a long journey from where they lived in **Nazareth** to Bethlehem because their ancestor was David whose hometown was Bethlehem.
* **26:2** Jesus went to the town of **Nazareth** where he had lived during his childhood.
* **26:7** The people of **Nazareth** dragged Jesus out of the place of worship and brought him to the edge of a cliff to throw him off of it in order to kill him.

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: G34780, G34790, G34800

* **Associated Passages:** Matthew 2:23; Matthew 4:13; Matthew 21:11; Matthew 26:71; Mark 1:9; Mark 1:24; Mark 10:47; Mark 14:67; Mark 16:6; Luke 1:26; Luke 2:4; Luke 2:39; Luke 2:51; Luke 4:16; Luke 4:34; Luke 18:37; Luke 24:19; John 1:45; John 1:46; John 18:5; John 18:7; John 19:19; Acts 2:22; Acts 3:6; Acts 4:10; Acts 6:14; Acts 10:38; Acts 22:8; Acts 24:5; Acts 26:9; Acts 26:9-11; John 1:43-45; Luke 1:26-29; Mark 16:5-7; Matthew 21:9-11; Matthew 26:71-72
* **Associated Articles:** Christ (ID: `26445@UWTranslationWords`); Galilee (ID: `26624@UWTranslationWords`); Joseph NT (ID: `26776@UWTranslationWords`); Mary (ID: `26856@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Nazareth (ID: `place:Nazareth`)
## Nazirite (id: 26904)

Nazirite, Nazirite vow
======================

Facts:
------

The term “Nazirite” refers to a person who has taken a “Nazirite vow.” Mostly men took this vow, but women could also take it.

* A person who took the Nazirite vow agreed to not have any food or drink made from grapes for period that had been agreed upon for the fulfillment of the vow. During this period he was also not to get his hair cut and not go near a dead body.
* When the required length of time had passed, and the vow had been fulfilled, the Nazirite would go to the priest and provide an offering. This would include the cutting and burning of his hair. All other restrictions would also be removed.
* Samson is a well\-known man in the Old Testament who was under the Nazirite vow.
* The angel announcing John the Baptist’s birth told Zechariah that his son would not drink strong drink, which may indicate that John was under the Nazirite vow.
* According to a passage in the book of Acts the apostle Paul may also have at one time taken this vow, according to one passage in the book of Acts.

(Translation suggestions: Translate Names)

(See also: John (the Baptist), sacrifice, Samson, vow, Zechariah (OT))

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Acts 18:18–19](https://ref.ly/Acts18:18-Acts18:19)
* [Amos 2:11–12](https://ref.ly/Amos2:11-Amos2:12)
* [Judges 13:5](https://ref.ly/Judg13:5)
* [Numbers 6:1–4](https://ref.ly/Num6:1-Num6:4)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H5139

* **Associated Passages:** Judges 13:5; Acts 18:18-19; Numbers 6:1-4; Amos 2:11-12
* **Associated Articles:** John the Baptist (ID: `26770@UWTranslationWords`); Sacrifice (ID: `27046@UWTranslationWords`); Samson (ID: `27051@UWTranslationWords`); Zechariah OT (ID: `27228@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Nazirites (ID: `group:Nazirite`)
## Nebuchadnezzar (id: 26905)

Nebuchadnezzar
==============

Facts:
------

Nebuchadnezzar was a king of the Babylonian Empire whose powerful army conquered many people groups and nations.

* Under Nebuchadnezzar’s leadership, the Babylonian army attacked and conquered the kingdom of Judah, and took most of the people of Judah to Babylon as captives. The captives were forced to live there for a period of 70 years known as the “Babylonian Exile.”
* One of the exiles, Daniel, interpreted some of King Nebuchadnezzar’s dreams.
* Three other captured Israelites, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, were thrown into a fiery furnace when they refused to bow down to a gigantic gold statue that Nebuchadnezzar had made.
* King Nebuchadnezzar was very arrogant and worshiped false gods. When he conquered Judah, he stole many gold and silver objects from the temple in Jerusalem.
* Because Nebuchadnezzar was proud and refused to turn away from worshiping false gods, Yahweh caused him to be destitute for seven years, living like an animal. After the seven years, God restored Nebuchadnezzar when he humbled himself and praised the one true God, Yahweh.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: arrogant, Azariah, Babylon, Hananiah, Mishael)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Chronicles 6:15](https://ref.ly/1Chr6:15)
* [2 Kings 25:1–3](https://ref.ly/2Kgs25:1-2Kgs25:3)
* [Daniel 1:2](https://ref.ly/Dan1:2)
* [Daniel 4:4](https://ref.ly/Dan4:4)
* [Ezekiel 26:8](https://ref.ly/Ezek26:8)

Examples from the Bible stories:
--------------------------------

* **20:6** About 100 years after the Assyrians destroyed the kingdom of Israel, God sent **Nebuchadnezzar**, king of the Babylonians, to attack the kingdom of Judah.
* **20:6** The king of Judah agreed to be **Nebuchadnezzar’s** servant and pay him a lot of money every year.
* **20:8** To punish the king of Judah for rebelling, **Nebuchadnezzar’s** soldiers killed the king’s sons in front of him and then made him blind.
* **20:9** **Nebuchadnezzar** and his army took almost all of the people of the kingdom of Judah to Babylon, leaving only the poorest people behind to plant the fields.

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H5019, H5020

* **Associated Passages:** 1 Chronicles 6:15; Ezra 1:7; Ezra 2:1; Ezra 5:12; Ezra 5:14; Ezra 6:5; Nehemiah 7:6; Ezekiel 26:8; Daniel 1:2; Daniel 4:4; 2 Kings 25:1-3
* **Associated Articles:** Arrogant (ID: `26335@UWTranslationWords`); Azariah (ID: `26354@UWTranslationWords`); Babylon (ID: `26358@UWTranslationWords`); Hananiah (ID: `26674@UWTranslationWords`); Mishael (ID: `26882@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Nebuchadnezzar (ID: `person:Nebuchadnezzar`)
## Negev (id: 26906)

Negev
=====

Facts:
------

The Negev is a desert region in the southern part of Israel, southwest of the Salt Sea.

* The original word means “the South,” and some English versions translate it this way.
* It could be that the “South” is not located where the Negev Desert is today.
* When Abraham lived in the city of Kadesh, he was in the Negev or southern region.
* Isaac was living in the Negev when Rebekah traveled to meet him and become his wife.
* The Jewish tribes of Judah and Simeon lived in this southern region.
* The largest city in the Negev region was Beersheba.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Abraham, Beersheba, Israel, Judah, Kadesh, Salt Sea, Simeon)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Genesis 12:9](https://ref.ly/Gen12:9)
* [Genesis 20:1–3](https://ref.ly/Gen20:1-Gen20:3)
* [Genesis 24:62](https://ref.ly/Gen24:62)
* [Joshua 3:14–16](https://ref.ly/Josh3:14-Josh3:16)
* [Numbers 13:17–20](https://ref.ly/Num13:17-Num13:20)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H5045, H6160

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 12:9; Genesis 13:1; Genesis 13:3; Genesis 13:14; Genesis 20:1; Genesis 24:62; Genesis 28:14; Obadiah 1:19; Obadiah 1:20; Numbers 13:17-20; Genesis 20:1-3; Joshua 3:14-16
* **Associated Articles:** Abraham (ID: `26282@UWTranslationWords`); Beersheba (ID: `26377@UWTranslationWords`); Israel (ID: `26737@UWTranslationWords`); Judah (ID: `26782@UWTranslationWords`); Kadesh (ID: `26791@UWTranslationWords`); Saltsea (ID: `27049@UWTranslationWords`); Simeon (ID: `27096@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Negev (ID: `place:Negeb`)
## Nehemiah (id: 26907)

Nehemiah
========

Facts:
------

Nehemiah was an Israelite forced to move to the Babylonian empire when the people of Israel and Judah were taken captive by the Babylonians.

* While he was the cupbearer to the Persian king, Artaxerxes, Nehemiah asked the king for permission to return to Jerusalem.
* Nehemiah led the Israelites in rebuilding the walls of Jerusalem which had been destroyed by the Babylonians.
* For twelve years Nehemiah was the governor of Jerusalem before returning to the king’s palace.
* The Old Testament book of Nehemiah tells the story of Nehemiah’s work in rebuilding the walls and his governing of the people in Jerusalem.
* There were also other men named Nehemiah in the Old Testament. Usually the name of the father was added, to distinguish which Nehemiah was being talked about.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Artaxerxes, Babylon, Jerusalem, son)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Ezra 2:1–2](https://ref.ly/Ezra2:1-Ezra2:2)
* [Nehemiah 1:2](https://ref.ly/Neh1:2)
* [Nehemiah 10:3](https://ref.ly/Neh10:3)
* [Nehemiah 12:46](https://ref.ly/Neh12:46)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H5166

* **Associated Passages:** Ezra 2:2; Nehemiah 1:1; Nehemiah 1:2; Nehemiah 3:16; Nehemiah 7:7; Nehemiah 8:9; Nehemiah 10:1; Nehemiah 10:3; Nehemiah 12:26; Nehemiah 12:46; Nehemiah 12:47; Ezra 2:1-2
* **Associated Articles:** Artaxerxes (ID: `26336@UWTranslationWords`); Babylon (ID: `26358@UWTranslationWords`); Jerusalem (ID: `26756@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Nehemiah (ID: `person:Nehemiah.2`); Nehemiah (ID: `person:Nehemiah.3`); Nehemiah (ID: `person:Nehemiah`)
## Neighbor (id: 26908)

neighbor, neighborhood, neighboring
===================================

Definition:
-----------

The term “neighbor” usually refers to a person who lives nearby. It can also refer more generally to someone who lives in the same community or people group.

* A “neighbor” is someone who would be protected and treated kindly because he is part of the same community.
* In the New Testament parable of the Good Samaritan, Jesus used the term “neighbor” figuratively, expanding its meaning to include all human beings, even someone who is considered an enemy.
* If possible, it is best to translate this term literally with a word or phrase that means “person who lives nearby.”

(See also: adversary, parable, people group, Samaria)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Acts 7:26–28](https://ref.ly/Acts7:26-Acts7:28)
* [Ephesians 4:25–27](https://ref.ly/Eph4:25-Eph4:27)
* [Galatians 5:14](https://ref.ly/Gal5:14)
* [James 2:8](https://ref.ly/Jas2:8)
* [John 9:8–9](https://ref.ly/John9:8-John9:9)
* [Luke 1:58](https://ref.ly/Luke1:58)
* [Matthew 5:43](https://ref.ly/Matt5:43)
* [Matthew 19:19](https://ref.ly/Matt19:19)
* [Matthew 22:39](https://ref.ly/Matt22:39)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H5997, H7138, H7453, H7468, H7934, G10690, G20870, G40400, G41390

* **Associated Passages:** Exodus 3:22; Exodus 11:2; Exodus 12:4; Exodus 20:16; Exodus 22:8; Exodus 22:9; Exodus 32:27; Proverbs 3:28; Proverbs 3:29; Proverbs 6:1; Proverbs 6:3; Proverbs 6:29; Proverbs 11:9; Proverbs 11:12; Proverbs 12:26; Proverbs 14:20; Proverbs 14:21; Proverbs 16:29; Proverbs 17:18; Proverbs 18:17; Proverbs 21:10; Proverbs 24:28; Proverbs 25:8; Proverbs 25:9; Proverbs 25:17; Proverbs 25:18; Proverbs 26:19; Proverbs 27:14; Proverbs 27:17; Proverbs 29:5; Matthew 5:43; Matthew 19:19; Matthew 22:39; Mark 12:31; Mark 12:33; Luke 1:58; Luke 10:27; Luke 10:29; Luke 10:36; Luke 14:12; Luke 15:6; Luke 15:9; John 9:8; Acts 7:27; Romans 13:9; Romans 13:10; Romans 15:2; 1 Corinthians 10:24; Galatians 5:14; Ephesians 4:25; James 2:8; James 4:12; John 9:8-9; Acts 7:26-28; Ephesians 4:25-27
* **Associated Articles:** Adversary (ID: `26292@UWTranslationWords`); Parable (ID: `26931@UWTranslationWords`); People Group (ID: `26941@UWTranslationWords`); Samaria (ID: `27050@UWTranslationWords`)

## New Moon (id: 26910)

new moon
========

Definition:
-----------

The term “new moon” refers to the moon when it looks like a small, crescent\-shaped sliver of light. This is the beginning phase of the moon as it moves in its orbit around the planet Earth at sunset. It also refers to the first day a new moon should be visible after the moon has been dark for a few days.

* In ancient times, new moons marked the beginnings of certain time periods, such as months.
* The Israelites celebrated a new moon festival that was marked by the blowing of a ram’s horn.
* The Bible also refers to this time as the “beginning of the month.”

(See also: month, earth, festival, horn, sheep)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Chronicles 23:31](https://ref.ly/1Chr23:31)
* [1 Samuel 20:5](https://ref.ly/1Sam20:5)
* [2 Kings 4:23–24](https://ref.ly/2Kgs4:23-2Kgs4:24)
* [Ezekiel 45:16–17](https://ref.ly/Ezek45:16-Ezek45:17)
* [Isaiah 1:12–13](https://ref.ly/Isa1:12-Isa1:13)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H2320, G33760, G35610

* **Associated Passages:** 1 Samuel 20:5; 1 Chronicles 23:31; Nehemiah 10:33; Colossians 2:16; Isaiah 1:12-13; Ezekiel 45:16-17; 2 Kings 4:23-24
* **Associated Articles:** Biblical Time Month (ID: `26394@UWTranslationWords`); Earth (ID: `26545@UWTranslationWords`); Festival (ID: `26597@UWTranslationWords`); Sheep (ID: `27082@UWTranslationWords`); Horn (ID: `26706@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** New Moon Festival (ID: `keyterm:NewMoonFestival`)
## Nile River (id: 26911)

Nile River, River of Egypt, the Nile
====================================

Facts:
------

The Nile is a very long and wide river in northeastern Africa. It is especially well known as the main river of Egypt.

* The Nile River flows north through Egypt and into the Mediterranean Sea.
* Crops grow well in the fertile land on either side of the Nile River.
* Most Egyptians live near the Nile River since it is an important source of water for food crops.
* The Israelites lived in the land of Goshen, which was very fertile because it was located along the Nile River.
* When Moses was a baby, his parents placed him in a basket among the reeds of the Nile to hide him from Pharaoh’s men.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Egypt, Goshen, Moses)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Amos 8:8](https://ref.ly/Amos8:8)
* [Genesis 41:1–3](https://ref.ly/Gen41:1-Gen41:3)
* [Jeremiah 46:8](https://ref.ly/Jer46:8)

Examples from the Bible stories:
--------------------------------

* **8:4** Egypt was a large, powerful country located along the **Nile River**.
* **9:4** Pharaoh saw that the Israelites were having many babies, so he ordered his people to kill all Israelite baby boys by throwing them into the **Nile River**.
* **9:6** When the boy’s parents could no longer hide him, they put him in a floating basket among the reeds along the edge of the **Nile River** in order to save him from being killed.
* **10:3** God turned the **Nile River** into blood, but Pharaoh still would not let the Israelites go.

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0216, H2975, H4714, H5104

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 41:1; Genesis 41:2; Genesis 41:3; Genesis 41:17; Genesis 41:18; Exodus 1:22; Exodus 2:3; Exodus 2:5; Exodus 4:9; Exodus 7:15; Exodus 7:17; Exodus 7:18; Exodus 7:20; Exodus 7:21; Exodus 7:24; Exodus 7:25; Exodus 8:3; Exodus 8:9; Exodus 8:11; Exodus 17:5; Jeremiah 46:8; Amos 8:8; Genesis 41:1-3
* **Associated Articles:** Egypt (ID: `26548@UWTranslationWords`); Goshen (ID: `26655@UWTranslationWords`); Moses (ID: `26889@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Nile River (ID: `place:Nile`); Egypt (ID: `place:Egypt`)
## Nineveh (id: 26912)

Nineveh, Ninevite
=================

Facts:
------

Nineveh was the capital city of Assyrian empire. A “Ninevite” was a person who lived in Nineveh.

* God sent the prophet Jonah to warn the Ninevites to turn from their wicked ways. The people stopped acting so violently and God did not destroy them at that time.
* The prophets Nahum and Zephaniah both prophesied that God would destroy Nineveh as judgment for their sin.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Assyria, Jonah, repent, turn)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Genesis 10:11–14](https://ref.ly/Gen10:11-Gen10:14)
* [Jonah 1:3](https://ref.ly/Jonah1:3)
* [Jonah 3:3](https://ref.ly/Jonah3:3)
* [Luke 11:32](https://ref.ly/Luke11:32)
* [Matthew 12:41](https://ref.ly/Matt12:41)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H5210, G35350, G35360

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 10:11; Genesis 10:12; Jonah 1:2; Jonah 1:3; Jonah 3:2; Jonah 3:3; Jonah 3:4; Jonah 3:5; Jonah 3:6; Jonah 3:7; Jonah 4:11; Matthew 12:41; Luke 11:30; Luke 11:32; Genesis 10:11-14
* **Associated Articles:** Assyria (ID: `26346@UWTranslationWords`); Jonah (ID: `26771@UWTranslationWords`); Repent (ID: `27028@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Nineveh (ID: `place:Nineveh`); Ninevites (ID: `group:Nineveh`); King of Nineveh (ID: `person:KingOfNineveh`)
## Noah (id: 26913)

Noah
====

Facts:
------

Noah was a man who lived over 4,000 years ago, at the time when God sent a worldwide flood to destroy all the evil people in the world. God told Noah to build a gigantic ark in which he and his family could live while the flood waters covered the earth.

* Noah was a righteous man who obeyed God in everything.
* When God told Noah how to build the gigantic ark, Noah built it exactly the way God told him to.
* Inside the ark, Noah and his family were kept safe, and later their children and grandchildren filled the earth with people again.
* Everyone born since the time of the flood is a descendant of Noah.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: descendant, ark)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Genesis 5:30–31](https://ref.ly/Gen5:30-Gen5:31)
* [Genesis 5:32](https://ref.ly/Gen5:32)
* [Genesis 6:8](https://ref.ly/Gen6:8)
* [Genesis 8:1](https://ref.ly/Gen8:1)
* [Hebrews 11:7](https://ref.ly/Heb11:7)
* [Matthew 24:37](https://ref.ly/Matt24:37)

Examples from the Bible stories:
--------------------------------

* **3:2** But **Noah** found favor with God.
* **3:4** **Noah** obeyed God. He and his three sons built the boat just the way God had told them.
* **3:13** Two months later God said to **Noah**, “You and your family and all the animals may leave the boat now. Have many children and grandchildren and fill the earth.” So **Noah** and his family came out of the boat.

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H5146, G35750

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 5:29; Genesis 5:30; Genesis 5:32; Genesis 6:8; Genesis 6:9; Genesis 6:10; Genesis 6:13; Genesis 6:22; Genesis 7:1; Genesis 7:5; Genesis 7:6; Genesis 7:7; Genesis 7:9; Genesis 7:11; Genesis 7:13; Genesis 7:15; Genesis 7:23; Genesis 8:1; Genesis 8:6; Genesis 8:11; Genesis 8:13; Genesis 8:15; Genesis 8:18; Genesis 8:20; Genesis 9:1; Genesis 9:8; Genesis 9:17; Genesis 9:18; Genesis 9:19; Genesis 9:20; Genesis 9:24; Genesis 9:28; Genesis 9:29; Genesis 10:1; Genesis 10:32; Matthew 24:37; Matthew 24:38; Luke 3:36; Luke 17:26; Luke 17:27; Hebrews 11:7; 1 Peter 3:20; 2 Peter 2:5; Genesis 5:30-31
* **Associated Articles:** Ark (ID: `26332@UWTranslationWords`); Descendant (ID: `26518@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Noah (ID: `person:Noah.2`); Noah (ID: `person:Noah`)
## Noble (id: 26914)

noble, nobleman, royal official
===============================

Definition:
-----------

The term “noble” refers to something that is excellent and of high quality. A “nobleman” is a person who belongs to a high political or social class. A man “of noble birth” is one who was born a nobleman.

* A nobleman was often an officer of the state, a close servant to the king.
* The term “nobleman” could also be translated by, “king’s official” or “government officer.”

Bible References:
-----------------

* [2 Chronicles 23:20–21](https://ref.ly/2Chr23:20-2Chr23:21)
* [Daniel 4:36](https://ref.ly/Dan4:36)
* [Ecclesiastes 10:17](https://ref.ly/Eccl10:17)
* [Luke 19:12](https://ref.ly/Luke19:12)
* [Psalm 16:1–3](https://ref.ly/Ps16:1-Ps16:3)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0117, H1419, H2715, H3358, H3513, H5057, H5081, H6440, H6579, H7261, H8282, H8269, G09370, G21040

* **Associated Passages:** Nehemiah 2:16; Nehemiah 3:5; Nehemiah 4:14; Nehemiah 4:19; Nehemiah 5:7; Nehemiah 6:17; Nehemiah 7:5; Nehemiah 10:29; Nehemiah 13:17; Proverbs 8:6; Proverbs 8:16; Proverbs 17:26; Proverbs 19:6; Proverbs 25:7; Ecclesiastes 10:17; Daniel 4:36; Luke 19:12; 1 Corinthians 1:26; 2 Chronicles 23:20-21; Psalms 16:1-3

