# Translation Words (unfoldingWord)

**unfoldingWord® Translation Words** © 2022 unfoldingWord. Released under CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. *unfoldingWord® Translation Words* has been adapted in the following languages: Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文) from *unfoldingWord® Translation Words* © 2022 unfoldingWord. Released under CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license by Mission Mutual



--------------------------------

## Oak (id: 26915)

oak
===

Definition:
-----------

An oak, or oak tree, is a tall shade tree with a large trunk and wide spreading branches.

* Oak trees have strong, hard wood that was used to build ships and to make farming plows, oxen yokes and walking sticks.
* The seed of an oak tree is called an acorn.
* The trunks of certain oak trees could bemeasured up to 6 meters around.
* Oak trees were symbolic of long life and had other spiritual meanings. In the Bible, they were often associated with holy places.

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* Many translations will find it important to use the term “oak tree” rather than just the word “oak.”
* If oak trees are not known in the receptor area, “an oak” could be translated as “an oak, which is a large shade tree like…,” then give the name of a local tree that has similar characteristics.

(See: How to Translate Unknowns)

(See also: holy)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Samuel 10:3–4](https://ref.ly/1Sam10:3-1Sam10:4)
* [Genesis 13:18](https://ref.ly/Gen13:18)
* [Genesis 14:13–14](https://ref.ly/Gen14:13-Gen14:14)
* [Genesis 35:4–5](https://ref.ly/Gen35:4-Gen35:5)
* [Judges 6:11–12](https://ref.ly/Judg6:11-Judg6:12)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0352, H0424, H0427, H0436, H0437, H0438

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 12:6; Genesis 13:18; Genesis 14:13; Genesis 18:1; Genesis 35:8; Genesis 35:4-5; Judges 6:11-12; 1 Samuel 10:3-4; Genesis 14:13-14
* **Associated Articles:** Holy (ID: `26698@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Oak (ID: `flora:Oak`); Terebinth (ID: `flora:Terebinth`); Oak of Moreh (ID: `place:Moreh`); Oak of Tabor (ID: `place:Tabor.2`); Allon-bachuth (ID: `place:Allon-bacuth`)
## Oath (id: 26916)

oath, vow, swear, swearing, swear by
====================================

Definition:
-----------

The term “oath” in the Bible refers to a formal promise, usually made in a legal or religious context, in which the person making the oath accepts some kind of accountability or punishment if he does not fulfill his promise. In the Bible, the term “swear” means to make an oath. A “vow” is a solemn promise or oath that a person makes to God.

* In a court of law, a witness often gives an oath to promise that whatever he says will be true and factual.
* In modern times, one meaning of the word “swear” is to use foul or vulgar language. This is never its meaning in the Bible.
* The term “swear by” means to use the name of something or someone as the basis or power on which the oath is made.
* Abraham and Abimelech swore an oath when they made a covenant together concerning the use of a well.
* Abraham told his servant to swear (formally promise) that he would find Isaac a wife from among Abraham’s relatives.
* God also made oaths in which he made promises to his people.
* If a person in ancient Israel made a vow to God, that person was obligated to fulfill the vow. The ancient Israelites believed that God might punish a person who did not fulfill a vow that he made.
* In ancient Israel, sometimes a person would ask God to protect him or provide for him in exchange for making the vow. However, the ancient Israelites did not believe that God was obligated to fulfill these requests.

Translation Suggestions:
------------------------

* Depending on the context, “an oath” could also be translated as “a pledge” or “a solemn promise.”
* To “swear” could be translated as to “formally promise” or to “pledge” or to “commit to do something.”
* Other ways to translate “swear by my name” could include “make a promise using my name to confirm it.”
* To “swear by heaven and earth” could be translated as to, “promise to do something, stating that heaven and earth will confirm it.”
* Make sure the translation of “swear” or “oath” does not refer to cursing. In the Bible it does not have that meaning.
* Depending on the context, the term “vow” can be translated as “solemn promise” or “solemn oath” or “promise made to God.”

(See also: Abimelech, covenant, promise)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Genesis 21:23](https://ref.ly/Gen21:23)
* [Genesis 24:3](https://ref.ly/Gen24:3)
* [Genesis 31:51–53](https://ref.ly/Gen31:51-Gen31:53)
* [Genesis 47:31](https://ref.ly/Gen47:31)
* [Luke 1:73](https://ref.ly/Luke1:73)
* [Mark 6:26](https://ref.ly/Mark6:26)
* [Matthew 5:36](https://ref.ly/Matt5:36)
* [Matthew 14:6–7](https://ref.ly/Matt14:6-Matt14:7)
* [Matthew 26:72](https://ref.ly/Matt26:72)
* [1 Corinthians 7:27–28](https://ref.ly/1Cor7:27-1Cor7:28)
* [Acts 21:23](https://ref.ly/Acts21:23)
* [Genesis 28:21](https://ref.ly/Gen28:21)
* [Genesis 31:12–13](https://ref.ly/Gen31:12-Gen31:13)
* [Jonah 1:14–16](https://ref.ly/Jonah1:14-Jonah1:16)
* [Jonah 2:9–10](https://ref.ly/Jonah2:9-Jonah2:10)
* [Proverbs 7:14](https://ref.ly/Prov7:14)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0422, H0423, H3027, H5375, H7621, H7650, G03320, G36600, G37270, G37280, H5087, H5088, G21710

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 21:23; Genesis 21:24; Genesis 21:31; Genesis 22:16; Genesis 24:3; Genesis 24:7; Genesis 24:8; Genesis 24:9; Genesis 24:37; Genesis 24:41; Genesis 25:33; Genesis 26:3; Genesis 26:28; Genesis 26:31; Genesis 28:21; Genesis 31:53; Genesis 47:31; Genesis 50:5; Genesis 50:6; Genesis 50:24; Genesis 50:25; Exodus 13:5; Exodus 13:11; Exodus 13:19; Exodus 22:11; Exodus 32:13; Exodus 33:1; Ezra 10:5; Nehemiah 5:12; Nehemiah 6:18; Nehemiah 10:29; Nehemiah 13:25; Job 31:30; Proverbs 7:14; Proverbs 29:24; Song of Songs 2:7; Song of Songs 3:5; Song of Songs 5:8; Song of Songs 5:9; Song of Songs 8:4; Matthew 5:33; Matthew 5:34; Matthew 5:36; Matthew 14:7; Matthew 14:9; Matthew 23:16; Matthew 23:18; Matthew 23:20; Matthew 23:21; Matthew 23:22; Matthew 26:72; Matthew 26:74; Mark 6:23; Mark 6:26; Mark 14:71; Luke 1:73; Acts 2:30; Acts 21:23; Hebrews 3:11; Hebrews 3:18; Hebrews 4:3; Hebrews 6:13; Hebrews 6:16; Hebrews 6:17; Hebrews 7:20; Hebrews 7:21; Hebrews 7:28; James 5:12; Revelation 10:6; Genesis 31:51-53; Matthew 14:6-7; 1 Corinthians 7:27-28; Genesis 31:12-13; Jonah 1:14-16; Jonah 2:9-10
* **Associated Articles:** Abimelech (ID: `26279@UWTranslationWords`); Covenant (ID: `26479@UWTranslationWords`); Promise (ID: `26985@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Oath (ID: `keyterm:Oath`)
## Obadiah (id: 26917)

Obadiah
=======

Facts:
------

Obadiah was an Old Testament prophet who prophesied against the people of Edom, who were the descendants of Esau. There were also many other men named Obadiah in the Old Testament.

* The book of Obadiah is the shortest book in the Old Testament and tells a prophecy that Obadiah received through a vision from God.
* It is not clear when Obadiah lived and prophesied. It may have been during the paeriods that Jehoram, Ahaziah, Joash, and Athaliah, reigned in Judah. The prophets Daniel, Ezekiel, and Jeremiah would also have been prophesying during part of this time.
* Obadiah may also have lived at a later time period, during the reign of King Zedekiah and the Babylonian captivity.
* Other men named Obadiah included a descendant of Saul, a Gadite who became one of David’s men, a palace administrator for King Ahab, an official of King Jehoshaphat, a man who helped with repairs to the temple during the time of King Josiah, and a Levite who was also a gatekeeper during the time of Nehemiah.
* It could be that the writer of the book of Obadiah was one of these men.

(Translation suggestions: Translate Names)

(See also: Ahab, Babylon, David, Edom, Esau, Ezekiel, Daniel, Gad, Jehoshaphat, Josiah, Levite, Saul (OT), Zedekiah)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Chronicles 3:21](https://ref.ly/1Chr3:21)
* [1 Chronicles 8:38–40](https://ref.ly/1Chr8:38-1Chr8:40)
* [Ezra 8:8–11](https://ref.ly/Ezra8:8-Ezra8:11)
* [Obadiah 1:2](https://ref.ly/Obad1:2)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H5662

* **Associated Passages:** 1 Chronicles 3:21; Ezra 8:9; Nehemiah 10:5; Nehemiah 12:25; Obadiah 1:1; Obadiah 1:2; 1 Chronicles 8:38-40; Ezra 8:8-11
* **Associated Articles:** Ahab (ID: `26296@UWTranslationWords`); Babylon (ID: `26358@UWTranslationWords`); Daniel (ID: `26500@UWTranslationWords`); David (ID: `26503@UWTranslationWords`); Edom (ID: `26547@UWTranslationWords`); Esau (ID: `26568@UWTranslationWords`); Ezekiel (ID: `26581@UWTranslationWords`); Gad (ID: `26622@UWTranslationWords`); Jehoshaphat (ID: `26750@UWTranslationWords`); Josiah (ID: `26779@UWTranslationWords`); Levite (ID: `26825@UWTranslationWords`); Saul (ID: `27058@UWTranslationWords`); Zedekiah (ID: `27229@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Obadiah (ID: `person:Obadiah.10`); Obadiah (ID: `person:Obadiah.11`); Obadiah (ID: `person:Obadiah.12`); Obadiah (ID: `person:Obadiah.2`); Obadiah (ID: `person:Obadiah.3`); Obadiah (ID: `person:Obadiah.4`); Obadiah (ID: `person:Obadiah.5`); Obadiah (ID: `person:Obadiah.6`); Obadiah (ID: `person:Obadiah.7`); Obadiah (ID: `person:Obadiah.8`); Obadiah (ID: `person:Obadiah.9`); Obadiah (ID: `person:Obadiah`); Zebadiah (ID: `person:Zebadiah.8`)
## Og (id: 26918)

Og
==

Facts:
------

Og is the name of a man who was an Amorite king who ruled over the land of Bashan.

* The Israelites conquered Og and his people and land.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Amorite, Bashan)

Bible References:
-----------------

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s:

* **Associated Articles:** Amorite (ID: `26312@UWTranslationWords`); Bashan (ID: `26368@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Og (ID: `person:Og`)
## Oil (id: 26919)

oil
===

Definition:
-----------

Oil is a thick, clear liquid that can be taken from certain plants. In Bible times, oil usually came from olives.

* Olive oil was used for cooking, anointing, sacrifice, lamps, and medicine.
* In ancient times, olive oil was highly prized, and the possession of oil was considered a measurement of wealth.
* Make sure the translation of this term refers to the kind of oil that can be used in cooking, not motor oil. Some languages have different words for these different kinds of oil.

(See also: olive, sacrifice)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [2 Samuel 1:21](https://ref.ly/2Sam1:21)
* [Exodus 29:2](https://ref.ly/Exod29:2)
* [Leviticus 5:11](https://ref.ly/Lev5:11)
* [Leviticus 8:1–3](https://ref.ly/Lev8:1-Lev8:3)
* [Mark 6:12–13](https://ref.ly/Mark6:12-Mark6:13)
* [Matthew 25:7–9](https://ref.ly/Matt25:7-Matt25:9)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H2091, H3323, H4887, H6671, H7246, H8081, G16370, G34640

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 28:18; Genesis 35:14; Exodus 27:20; Exodus 29:2; Exodus 29:7; Exodus 29:21; Exodus 29:23; Exodus 30:24; Exodus 30:25; Exodus 30:31; Exodus 31:11; Exodus 35:14; Exodus 35:15; Exodus 35:28; Exodus 37:29; Exodus 39:37; Exodus 39:38; Exodus 40:9; Leviticus 5:11; 2 Samuel 1:21; Ezra 3:7; Ezra 6:9; Ezra 7:22; Nehemiah 5:11; Nehemiah 8:15; Nehemiah 10:37; Nehemiah 10:39; Nehemiah 13:5; Nehemiah 13:12; Proverbs 5:3; Proverbs 21:17; Proverbs 21:20; Proverbs 27:9; Proverbs 27:16; Matthew 25:3; Matthew 25:4; Matthew 25:8; Matthew 26:7; Matthew 26:12; Mark 6:13; Luke 7:37; Luke 7:38; Luke 7:46; Luke 10:34; Luke 16:6; Hebrews 1:9; James 5:14; Revelation 6:6; Revelation 18:13; Mark 6:12-13; Leviticus 8:1-3; Matthew 25:7-9
* **Associated Articles:** Olive (ID: `26920@UWTranslationWords`); Sacrifice (ID: `27046@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Olive Oil (ID: `realia:OliveOil`); Anointing Oil (ID: `realia:AnointingOil`)
## Olive (id: 26920)

olive
=====

Definition:
-----------

The olive is the small, oval fruit from an olive tree, which is mostly grown in the regions surrounding the Mediterranean Sea.

* Olive trees are a type of large evergreen shrub with tiny white flowers. They grow best in hot weather and can survive well with little water.
* The olive tree’s fruit starts out green and changes to black as they ripen. Olives were useful for food and for the oil that could be extracted from them.
* Olive oil was used for cooking in lamps and for religious ceremonies.
* In the Bible, olive trees and branches are sometimes used figuratively to refer to people.

(See also: lamp, the sea, Mount of Olives)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Chronicles 27:28–29](https://ref.ly/1Chr27:28-1Chr27:29)
* [Deuteronomy 6:10–12](https://ref.ly/Deut6:10-Deut6:12)
* [Exodus 23:10–11](https://ref.ly/Exod23:10-Exod23:11)
* [Genesis 8:11](https://ref.ly/Gen8:11)
* [James 3:12](https://ref.ly/Jas3:12)
* [Luke 16:6](https://ref.ly/Luke16:6)
* [Psalms 52:8](https://ref.ly/Ps52:8)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H2132, H3323, H8081, G00650, G16360, G16370, G25650

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 8:11; Exodus 23:11; Exodus 25:6; Exodus 27:20; Exodus 30:24; Exodus 35:8; Nehemiah 5:11; Nehemiah 8:15; Nehemiah 9:25; Job 29:6; Psalms 52:8; Song of Songs 1:3; Song of Songs 4:10; Haggai 2:12; Matthew 24:3; Matthew 26:30; Mark 11:1; Mark 13:3; Mark 14:26; Luke 16:6; Luke 19:29; Luke 19:37; Luke 21:37; Luke 22:39; Acts 1:12; Romans 11:17; Romans 11:24; James 3:12; Revelation 11:4; Exodus 23:10-11; 1 Chronicles 27:28-29; Deuteronomy 6:10-12
* **Associated Articles:** Lamp (ID: `26812@UWTranslationWords`); Mount of Olives (ID: `26892@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Olive Tree (ID: `flora:OliveTree`); Olive Oil (ID: `realia:OliveOil`); Mount of Olives (ID: `place:OlivesMount`); Anointing Oil (ID: `realia:AnointingOil`)
## Omri (id: 26921)

Omri
====

Facts:
------

Omri was an army commander who became the sixth king of Israel.

* King Omri reigned for twelve years in the city of Tirzah.
* Like all the kings of Israel before him, Omri was a very evil king who led the people of Israel into more idol worship.
* Omri was also the father of King Ahab.

(Translation suggestions: How to Translate Names)

(See also: Ahab, Israel, Jeroboam, Tirzah)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [2 Chronicles 22:1–3](https://ref.ly/2Chr22:1-2Chr22:3)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H6018

* **Associated Passages:** 2 Chronicles 22:1-3
* **Associated Articles:** Ahab (ID: `26296@UWTranslationWords`); Israel (ID: `26737@UWTranslationWords`); Jeroboam (ID: `26755@UWTranslationWords`); Tirzah (ID: `27163@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Omri (ID: `person:Omri.2`); Omri (ID: `person:Omri.3`); Omri (ID: `person:Omri.4`); Omri (ID: `person:Omri`); Ahaziah (ID: `person:Ahaziah.2`); Jerusalem (ID: `place:Jerusalem`)
## On High (id: 26922)

on high, in the highest
=======================

Definition:
-----------

The terms “on high” and “in the highest” are expressions that usually mean “in heaven.”

* Another meaning for the expression “in the highest” could be “the most honored.”
* This expression could also be used literally, as in the expression “in the highest tree,” which means “in the tallest tree.”
* The expression “on high” could also refer to being high in the sky, such as a bird’s nest that is on high. In that context it could be translated as “high in the sky” or “at the top of a tall tree.”
* The word “high” could also indicate the elevated location or importance of a person or thing.
* The expression “from on high” could be translated as “from heaven.”

(See also: heaven, honor)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Lamentations 1:13](https://ref.ly/Lam1:13)
* [Psalms 69:29](https://ref.ly/Ps69:29)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H1361, H4605, H4791, H7682, G17220, G53080, G53100, G53110

* **Associated Passages:** Psalms 69:29; Lamentations 1:13; Matthew 21:9; Mark 11:10; Luke 1:78; Luke 2:14; Luke 19:38; Luke 24:49; Ephesians 4:8; Hebrews 1:3
* **Associated Articles:** Heaven (ID: `26683@UWTranslationWords`); Honor (ID: `26704@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Height (ID: `keyterm:Height`); LORD (ID: `deity:Lord`)
## Ordain (id: 26923)

ordain, ordained, ordination, planned long ago, set up, prepared
================================================================

Definition:
-----------

To ordain means to formally appoint a person for a special task or role. It also means to formally make a rule or decree.

* The term “ordain” often refers to formally appointing somebody as a priest, minister, or rabbi.
* For example, God ordained Aaron and his descendants to be priests.
* It can also mean to institute or establish something, such as a religious feast or covenant.
* Depending on the context, to “ordain” could be translated as to “assign” or to “appoint” or to “command” or to “make a rule” or to “institute.”

(See also: command, covenant, decree, law, law, priest)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Kings 12:31–32](https://ref.ly/1Kgs12:31-1Kgs12:32)
* [2 Samuel 17:13–14](https://ref.ly/2Sam17:13-2Sam17:14)
* [Exodus 28:40–41](https://ref.ly/Exod28:40-Exod28:41)
* [Numbers 3:3](https://ref.ly/Num3:3)
* [Psalms 111:7–9](https://ref.ly/Ps111:7-Ps111:9)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H3245, H4390, H6186, H6213, H6680, H7760, H8239, G12990, G25250, G42700, G42820

* **Associated Passages:** Numbers 3:3; Matthew 21:16; Luke 3:13; Acts 7:53; Romans 9:22; 1 Corinthians 11:34; 1 Corinthians 16:1; Titus 1:5; Hebrews 10:5; Hebrews 11:3; 1 Kings 12:31-32; 2 Samuel 17:13-14; Exodus 28:40-41; Psalms 111:7-9
* **Associated Articles:** Covenant (ID: `26479@UWTranslationWords`); Decree (ID: `26508@UWTranslationWords`); Law (ID: `26815@UWTranslationWords`); Law of Moses (ID: `26817@Unknown`); Priest (ID: `26979@UWTranslationWords`)

## Ordinance (id: 26924)

ordinance, regulations, requirements, strict law, customs
=========================================================

Definition:
-----------

An ordinance is a public regulation or law that gives rules or instructions for people to follow. This term is related to the term “ordain.”

* Sometimes an ordinance is a custom that has become well established through years of practice.
* In the Bible, an ordinance was something that God commanded the Israelites to do. Sometimes he commanded them to do it forever.
* The term “ordinance” could be translated as “public decree” or “regulation” or “law,” depending on the context.

(See also: command, decree, law, ordain, statute)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [Deuteronomy 4:13–14](https://ref.ly/Deut4:13-Deut4:14)
* [Exodus 27:20–21](https://ref.ly/Exod27:20-Exod27:21)
* [Leviticus 8:31–33](https://ref.ly/Lev8:31-Lev8:33)
* [Malachi 3:6–7](https://ref.ly/Mal3:6-Mal3:7)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H2706, H4687, H4931, H4941

* **Associated Passages:** Exodus 15:25; Exodus 21:1; Exodus 21:9; Exodus 21:31; Exodus 24:3; Exodus 29:28; Ezra 3:4; Ezra 7:10; Nehemiah 8:18; Luke 1:6; Acts 16:4; Acts 17:7; Romans 1:32; Romans 2:26; Romans 8:4; Ephesians 2:15; Colossians 2:14; Hebrews 9:1; Hebrews 9:10; Exodus 27:20-21; Deuteronomy 4:13-14; Leviticus 8:31-33; Malachi 3:6-7
* **Associated Articles:** Decree (ID: `26508@UWTranslationWords`); Law (ID: `26815@UWTranslationWords`); Law of Moses (ID: `26817@Unknown`); Ordain (ID: `26923@UWTranslationWords`); Statute (ID: `27118@UWTranslationWords`)

* **Associated ACAI Concepts:** Regulations (ID: `keyterm:Regulations`)
## Overseer (id: 26925)

oversee, overseer, keeper
=========================

Definition:
-----------

The term “overseer” refers to a person who is in charge of the work and welfare of other people. In the Bible, often the term “keeper” means “overseer.”

* In the Old Testament, an overseer had the job of making sure the workers under him did their work well.
* In the New Testament, this term is used to describe leaders of the early Christian church. Their work was to take care of the spiritual needs of the church, making sure the believers received accurate biblical teaching.
* Paul refers to an overseer as being like a shepherd who takes care of the believers in a local church, who are his “flock.”
* The overseer, like a shepherd, keeps watch over the flock. He guards and protects the believers from false spiritual teaching and other evil influences.
* In the New Testament, the terms “overseers,” “elders,” and “shepherds/pastors” are different ways of referring to the same spiritual leaders.

Translation Suggestions
-----------------------

* Other ways to translate this term could be “supervisor” or “caretaker” or “manager.”
* When referring to a leader of a local group of God’s people, this term could be translated with a word or phrase that means “spiritual supervisor” or “someone who takes care of the spiritual needs of a group of believers” or “person who oversees the spiritual needs of the Church.”

(See also: church, elder, pastor, shepherd)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [1 Chronicles 26:31–32](https://ref.ly/1Chr26:31-1Chr26:32)
* [1 Timothy 3:2](https://ref.ly/1Tim3:2)
* [Acts 20:28](https://ref.ly/Acts20:28)
* [Genesis 41:33–34](https://ref.ly/Gen41:33-Gen41:34)
* [Philippians 1:1](https://ref.ly/Phil1:1)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H5329, H6485, H6496, H7860, H8104, G19830, G19840, G19850

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 39:4; Genesis 39:5; Genesis 41:34; Exodus 1:11; Ezra 3:8; Ezra 3:9; Nehemiah 2:8; Nehemiah 3:29; Nehemiah 11:9; Nehemiah 11:14; Nehemiah 11:16; Nehemiah 11:22; Acts 20:28; Philippians 1:1; 1 Timothy 3:1; 1 Timothy 3:2; Titus 1:7; 1 Peter 2:25; 1 Peter 5:2; Genesis 41:33-34; 1 Chronicles 26:31-32
* **Associated Articles:** Church (ID: `26448@UWTranslationWords`); Elder (ID: `26551@UWTranslationWords`); Shepherd (ID: `27084@UWTranslationWords`)

## Overtake (id: 26926)

overtake
========

Definition:
-----------

The term “overtake” and “overtook” refer to gaining control over someone or something. It usually includes the idea of catching up to something after pursuing it.

* When military troops “overtake” an enemy, it means they defeat that enemy in battle.
* When a predator overtakes its prey, it means that it pursues and catches its prey.
* If a curse “overtakes” someone, it means that whatever was said in that curse happens to the person
* If blessings “overtake” people, it means that those people experience those blessings.
* Depending on the context, “overtake” could be translated as “conquer” or “capture” or “defeat” or “catch up to” or “completely affect.”
* The past action “overtook” can be translated as “caught up to” or “came alongside of” or “conquered” or “defeated” or “caused harm to.”
* When used in a warning that darkness or punishment or terrors will overtake people because of their sin, it means that those people will experience these negative things if they don’t repent.
* The phrase “My words have overtaken your fathers” means that the teachings that Yahweh gave to their ancestors will now cause the ancestors to receive punishment because they failed to obey those teachings.

(See also: bless, curse, prey, punish)

Bible References:
-----------------

* [2 Kings 25:4–5](https://ref.ly/2Kgs25:4-2Kgs25:5)
* [John 12:35](https://ref.ly/John12:35)

Word Data:
----------

* Strong’s: H0579, H0935, H1692, H4672, H5066, H5381, G26380, G29830

* **Associated Passages:** Genesis 31:25; Genesis 44:4; Genesis 44:6; Exodus 15:9; John 12:35; 1 Thessalonians 5:4; 2 Kings 25:4-5
* **Associated Articles:** Bless (ID: `26403@UWTranslationWords`); Curse (ID: `26490@UWTranslationWords`); Prey (ID: `26978@UWTranslationWords`); Punish (ID: `26999@UWTranslationWords`)

